École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

École doctorale de l’EHESS

Submitted to the University Senate

Laboratoire d’anthropologie sociale
Doctorat | Doctorate
Discipline : Anthropologie sociale | Social anthropology

Eliran Arazi
From the Cannibal Eagle to the Trading Egret (and Back Again):
Amazonian Dynamics of Power between Forest and Market
Thèse dirigée par | Thesis supervised by Philippe Descola and Nurit Stadler

Date de soutenance | Defense Date: 11.6.2024

Rapporteurs | Reporters:

1 – Natalia Buitron
2 – Juan Álvaro Echeverri

Jury:

1 – Natalia Buitron
2 – Juan Álvaro Echeverri
3 – Carlos Fausto
4 – Vincent Hirtzel
5 – Stephen Hugh-Jones

2

To the memory of my father, Haim Arazi (HaCohen)
And my friend Lisimaco Andoque Macuna

3

4

« Quelle peut être la nature de ces actions dissymétriques ? Je pense, quant à moi, qu’elles sont d’ordre
cosmique. L’univers est un ensemble dissymétrique, et je suis persuadé que la vie, telle qu’elle se
manifeste à nous, est fonction de la dissymétrie de l’univers ou des conséquences qu’elle entraine »
(Pasteur 1922 [1874], 1:361)
(“What may be the nature of these asymmetrical actions? In my opinion, they are of a cosmic order. The
universe is an asymmetrical ensemble, and I am convinced that life, as it manifests to us, is a function of
the universe’s asymmetry or its implications” [my translation])

5

6

Acknowledgements
This doctoral research, a journey spanning three continents and requiring a plunge into a field that was
entirely new to me, could not have come to fruition as the dissertation you are about to read without the
support and help of numerous individuals at different stages of this long journey.
First and foremost, to my friends from the Aduche Reserve: Estoy agradecido con mis amigos, amigas, e
interlocutores Andoque, incluyendo a sus cónyuges y vecinos, quienes me invitaron a sus hogares,
compartieron conmigo su comida y mambe, me acogieron en sus rutinas diarias y me confiaron sus
preocupaciones actuales. Me mantuvieron seguro (¡y bien entretenido!) en un entorno desconocido,
iniciándome en sus profundas tradiciones y presentándome un mundo inmenso de sabiduría y
complejidades. Mi más sincero agradecimiento especialmente para Fisi Andoque (para evitar la
repetición, el apellido Andoque/Andoke se omite de aquí en adelante) y su esposa Isabel Macuna, para
sus hijos Nestor, Hernando, Emilse, Isabel y el fallecido Lisimaco; para Tañe e Irene, y sus hijos Levy,
Willer y Wilson; para Luis Ángel (Iai), Argelio, Delio, Orlando, Edilio, Mindo, María, John William y
Janier; para Mario (el padre), Mario (el hijo), la fallecida Gloria, Reinaldo y Nicolas; para Rodolfo,
Maite, Custodio y Luz Nidia; para Raquel y el fallecido Beroke, y sus hijos Miryan, Elías, Paulina,
Jenny, Nora Alba y Willington; para la familia Palacios—Alfonso, María Sabina, Adán, María Cándida,
Elisa, Walter Niver y Rubiel; para Nancy, su esposo Faustino Fiagama, y sus hijos Anthony, Bron,
Shari, Anyi y Liliana, así como Leomar; para Iris y su esposo Hernando Castro; y para Nelson, Germán
y Jesús Miguel. Sus historias, hospitalidad y enseñanzas fueron la carne y los huesos de esta
investigación, y por lo tanto, estaré eternamente agradecido. Adicionalmente deseo expresar mi gratitud
a las poderosas entidades no humanas del territorio ancestral andoque: los espíritus guardianes de la caza
que consumí, de las malocas que me cobijaron, del bosque que nos rodeaba y de los ríos que nos
llevaron, de los sitios que visité y de la coca que impartió sabiduría. Gracias por acogerme en esta “tierra
de vida,” por su protección y sustento, y por revelar una fracción de su compleja y multifacética
realidad.
I express my profound gratitude to my supervisors, Philippe Descola and Nurit Stadler, for their
immense support and encouragement to pursue my interests and tell a story that many onlookers deemed
too intricate and lengthy. Philippe, I am particularly grateful to you for igniting my passion for
Amazonian ethnography and for welcoming me into this field, for believing in my project despite my
initial outsider stance and during its different transformations, for your thoughtful direction as I

7

navigated through potential research populations, and for generously sharing your vast experience and
profound insights with me. Nurit, I am thankful for your attentive guidance and enlightening mentoring
across all facets of research, writing, and lecturing, among the countless other tasks that have culminated
in this dissertation, for mentoring me into the academic profession, and for inviting me to join the
wonderful, warm family of students that you are actively nurturing, and among whom I enjoyed growing
as a scholar.
During my studies, I was fortunate to be accompanied by the three members of my thesis committee,
who, beyond being leading experts of Amazonian and animist societies, are supportive, generous, and
deeply committed individuals: Stephen Hugh-Jones, Nurit Bird-David, and Carlos Fausto. I owe you all
many thanks for your invaluable input during our numerous consultations and for the ongoing feedback
on my work.
I am deeply indebted to several specialists in Colombia whose assistance was crucial at various stages of
my project. I extend my gratitude to François Correa Rubio and Camilo Alberto Robayo Romero for
their guidance within the local anthropological context; to Juan Álvaro Echeverri Restrepo for
introducing me to the Andoque and for his precious advice on fieldwork in the Araracuara sector; and to
Roberto Pineda Camacho for our enlightening conversations about the Andoque’s past and present.
Special thanks are due to Jon Landaburu for his dedication in instructing me in the foundations of the
Andoque language, for patiently and meticulously addressing my many, often unconventional, linguistic
questions, and for sharing his extensive knowledge of this people during our many discussions.
My research has been made possible thanks to the financial support I received at different stages from
various organizations: Campus France, which provided funding for my first year in France; the Azrieli
Foundation and its three-year fellowship; the Wenner-Gren Foundation for the Dissertation Fieldwork
Grant; and the Musée du quai Branly for both the Prix Martine Aublet and its doctoral fellowship in
2022–23. The Azrieli Foundation has provided me with an exceptional academic community and has
been a pillar of unwavering support. I am particularly thankful to Rochelle Avitan and Tal Mordoch, as
well as to Miriam Ben-David and Elinor Tubul, who were immensely helpful during their time there. At
the Musée du quai Branly, my special thanks go to Leandro Varison, as well as to former staff Philippe
Charlier and Vincent Guigueno.
I am equally grateful to the dedicated staff of the institutions that hosted my PhD research—the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, the École des hautes études en sciences sociales, and the Laboratoire
8

d’anthropologie sociale at the Collège de France. Their invaluable assistance with administrative and
financial matters, as well as in obtaining access to essential bibliography, was crucial to my research.
Special thanks are extended to Miriam Schiff, Efrat Radotz, Keren Nacass-Moualem, Galila Spharim,
Vanessa Szenwald-Liwicki, Sophie Assal, Sandrine Lecointre, Linda Brendlin, Patricia Rigole, and
Marie-Pia Maisonnave.
My research has been significantly enhanced by the teachings, guidance, and stimulating discussions
with esteemed professors and scholars from these institutions and beyond. I am profoundly grateful to
Andrea-Luz Gutierrez-Choquevilca, Alexandre Surrallés, Michael Houseman, Isabelle Daillant, Olivier
Allard, François Bourgue, Isabelle Daillant, Tamar Elor, Michal Frenkel, Yehuda Goodman, Tom
Griffiths, Philippe Erikson, Vincent Hirtzel, Ofra Goldstein-Gidoni, Edna Lomsky-Feder, Noa Lavi,
Carlos David Londoño Sulkin, Danny Naveh, Liron Shani, Anne-Christine Taylor, Anath Ariel de
Vidas, Emmanuel de Vienne, Harry Walker, and Cédric Yvinec for their treasured insights and advice. I
am also thankful to six historians who were instrumental in my transition to anthropology: Sylvie
Honigman, Vered Noam, Irad Malkin, Gadi Algazi, Youval Rotman, and Igal Halfin.
I owe my deep gratitude to my dear friends and colleagues across several countries for their help in so
many ways, each one in their own merit, for either supporting me during fieldwork difficulties,
accompanying me during the long process of thesis writing, providing me valuable feedback on my
work, enlightening me through provoking conversations, or all the above: Essam Assali, Yossi Bartal,
David Felipe Guerrero Beltrán, Aelad Cahana, Vincent Capmartin, Paul Codjia, Ophir Darki, Emile
Domine, Jules Domine, Rachel Doron, David Dupuis, Shvat Eilat, Milena Estorniolo, Ido Feder, Yotam
Feldman, Oscar Iván García, Jean-Baptiste Georges-Picot, Chemi Gera, Lydia Ginsburg, Hervé
González, Netta Green, Mariana Guanabara, Omer Hacker, Ofri Ilany, Raphael Julliard, Matan
Kaminer, Ben Kasstan, Abraham Kritzman, Samuel Labbé, Maria Luisa Lucas, Maxime Martignon,
Meïr Bar Maïmon, Fernanda Moraes, Simon Moritz, Ron Naïweld, Danny Neyman, Diana Rosas Riaño,
Shai Satran, Shaul Setter, Eran Shani, Jusmeet Singh Sihra, Christopher Sweetapple, Lea Taragin-Zeller,
Stéphanie Tselouiko, Bar Yerushalmi, Daniel Zohar, and Joaquín Ruiz Zubizarreta. I am especially
grateful to Pietro Fornasetti for his most precious help in kinship analysis.
I am particularly thankful to my friends in Colombia: Yago Barbosa, Jonathan Diaztagle, Erica Eljach,
Camilo Ernesto Morales, Teresita Ortega Muñoz, Luz Adriana Quigua, Sebastián Galindo Ramirez,
Claudia Ramirez, and Hector David Marin Rodas. Thank you for the crucial support during my

9

fieldwork and visits to the city, for our enlightening discussions, and for sharing the depth, dynamism,
and wealth of your culture, thus enabling me to gain a deeper understanding of the national context
surrounding the Andoque. Additionally, special thanks to Fernando Diaz, Jorge Restrepo, and Camila
Peña Gómez for sharing their insights on environmental activism in the Middle Caquetá.
This work would not have been achieved without my own supportive “tribe”—my family. To my
mother, Bat Sheva Arazi Michaeli; my sisters, Aliza Arazi, Rinat Alon, and Limor Hepner; and their
spouses, Menashe Michaeli and Erez Hepner: thank you for nurturing the curiosity within me to explore
the other side of the world and the courage to pursue my dreams.
Last, but certainly not least, I wish to express my deepest thanks to my partner, Gadiel Levi, who not
only designed some of the illuminating graphics within this dissertation but has also proven himself as a
passionate and adept explorer of the Amazonian rainforest. Gadi, you have been a tremendous source of
support and solace throughout this lengthy and sometimes challenging journey; thank you for being part
of my center.

10

Abstract
This dissertation investigates the shaping and manifestation of power notions and dynamics among the
Andoque, an Indigenous people of Northwest Amazonia, Colombia, through three types of
entanglements: within the Indigenous population, with nonhuman entities in the Andoque territory, and
with non-Indigenous agents. My analysis is informed by myths, oral histories, and biographical
trajectories collected during ethnographic fieldwork in the Andoque ancestral territory between April
2018 and June 2019 and from interviews with Andoque migrants in Leticia, as well as observations of
economic transactions, political assemblies, and other social interactions. Building on anthropological
literature on the continuity between human and nonhuman relations in animism/perspectivism and on
familiarization and mastery as asymmetrical relational frameworks in Amazonia, I explore power
beyond the realm of leadership and the public political arena, and define it within a context-transcending
framework of exchange. I demonstrate that power is manifested in the capacity of both human and
nonhuman agents to transform their relationships from symmetrical exchanges of bodies, vital
principles, material goods, and action into asymmetrical ones that benefit their efforts to produce
persons, while countering adversarial imbalances. Power stems from and facilitates the conversion of
potentially harmful affinal relatives into safer, more benevolent consanguineal kin, and manifests in the
preconditions of exchange: the capacity to refuse or suspend exchange and to participate in the
transaction as its agent, rather than the transacted object.
Spanning the fields of politics, economy, kinship, myth and ritual, my analysis can be narrowed into
exchanges within three conceptual domains with largely overlapping distinctions: ontological, kinship,
and spatial. In the ontological domain, exchanges are rooted in the animist principle of shared
interiority among beings with distinct bodily forms. This shared interiority leads to a default reciprocal
homosubstitution of persons of one kind for those of another. Meanwhile, capable individuals engage in
ontological manipulations to create asymmetry with nonhumans by enforcing heterosubstitutive
exchange, in which they compensate for game with vegetal substances, or exploiting homosubstitution
in sorcery assaults, transforming human victims into prey. Ontological manipulation is closely related to
graded agency, which becomes apparent in kinship practices and imagery. Here, despite the
Andoque’s cognatic kinship principles, their strong clan identities foster attempts at asymmetry in interclan relations. Agnatic descent is associated with higher agency over non-agnatic kin, non-kin, and
nonhumans. In humans, diminished agency resembles states of domination, while in nonhumans, it can

11

parallel—but does not equate to—the objectification seen in naturalism. Finally, power is anchored in
spatial perceptions. The Andoque consider themselves as living at the center of a world axed upon the
river’s course, resulting in the division of surrounding space into upriver, closer to the river source, and
downriver, nearer to the river mouth. Using procedures of familiarization, appropriation, and
encompassment, those living at the center draw upon forces, elements, and mythical figures associated
with the river source for their survival and prosperity amid rival human and nonhuman centers. A
similar pursuit of encompassment characterizes the center’s relationship with the river mouth—an
affinal realm representing non-Indigenous people. This spatial framework also encapsulates historical
trajectories of slavery, extractivism, and, ultimately, efforts at preservation, where asymmetrical
exchanges between the Andoque and non-Indigenous agents redefine power dynamics between the
former and nonhuman beings.
My findings reveal that the uncertainty in exchange with human and nonhuman beings renders relational
asymmetries inherently precarious. The knowledge required to establish and sustain these imbalances is
a critical and contested resource, made even scarcer by a genocide in the early twentieth century that
eradicated many sages and oral traditions. Furthermore, Andoque members often express their concerns
about their vulnerability within power dynamics involving non-Indigenous agents, nonhuman entities,
and even members of their own group. Therefore, considering the context of near demographic collapse,
increasing assimilation into Colombian society, and a continuous precarious position in the regional
economy, this research examines power within a society experiencing an enduring crisis of power.
My research contributes to the broader debate on power within the social sciences and political thought
by highlighting the continuum between social interactions among humans and those involving
nonhumans in societies where nonhumans are recognized as agents. Concurrently, I push forward the
research into the human-nonhuman relational continuum within Amazonian animism and perspectivism,
establishing power as both the outcome of and the instrument for an enchainment of symmetrical and
predominantly asymmetrical relationships, and revealing the interplay between power dynamics of
human-nonhuman relations and those between Indigenous and non-Indigenous agents. My approach
reveals the power dynamics permeating relationships in an Amazonian sub-region characterized by
agnatic ideology—namely, the Caquetá-Putumayo—thereby elucidating the social and ontological
transformations in the recent history of its Indigenous inhabitants. My analysis thus challenges the

12

perception of egalitarianism often associated with Indigenous Amazonia, allowing for a comparison of
the animist configurations in the Caquetá-Putumayo with other societies within this region and beyond.

13

14

Resumé
Cette thèse porte sur les conceptions et la dynamique du pouvoir parmi les Andoque, un peuple
autochtone du nord-ouest de l’Amazonie en Colombie, interrogeant comment celles-ci sont façonnées et
se manifestent à travers trois types d’imbrication : au sein de la population autochtone, avec les entités
non humaines du territoire, et avec les agents non-autochtones. Notre analyse s’appuie sur des mythes,
des histoires orales et des trajectoires biographiques recueillies lors d’une enquête de terrain dans le
territoire ancestral andoque et lors d’entretiens avec des migrants andoque à Leticia, ainsi que sur des
observations de transactions économiques, d’assemblées politiques et d’autres interactions sociales. En
nous fondant sur la littérature anthropologique portant sur la continuité entre les relations humaines et
non humaines dans l’animisme/perspectivisme et sur la familiarisation et la maîtrise en tant que modes
asymétriques de socialité en Amazonie, nous définissons le pouvoir dans un cadre d’échange et
l’étudions au-delà du domaine du leadership et de l’arène politique publique. Nous démontrons que le
pouvoir se manifeste dans la capacité des agents humains et non humains à transformer des relations
symétriques d’échanges de corps, de principes vitaux, de biens matériels et d’actions en relations
asymétriques qui profitent à leurs efforts pour produire des personnes, tout en contrebalançant les
déséquilibres adverses. Le pouvoir provient de et facilite la transformation de parents affins
potentiellement dangereux en parents consanguins plus bienveillants, et se manifeste dans les
préconditions de l’échange : la capacité de refuser ou de suspendre l’échange et de participer à la
transaction en tant qu’agent, plutôt qu’objet échangé.
Couvrant les domaines de la politique, de l’économie, de la parenté, du mythe et du rituel, notres analyse
peut être distillée à des échanges au sein de trois domaines conceptuels avec des distinctions largement
enchevêtrées : ontologique, de parenté et spatial. Dans le domaine ontologique, les échanges sont
enracinés dans le principe animiste d’une intériorité partagée entre des êtres aux formes corporelles
distinctes. Cette intériorité partagée conduit à une homosubstitution réciproque par défaut de personnes
d’un type pour celles d’un autre. En revanche, les individus capables se livrent à des manipulations
ontologiques pour créer une asymétrie avec les non-humains en imposant un échange hétérosubstitutif,
dans lequel ils compensent le gibier avec des substances végétales, ou en exploitant l’homosubstitution
dans les assauts de sorcellerie, transformant les victimes humaines en proie. La manipulation
ontologique est étroitement liée à l’agentivité graduée, qui devient apparente dans les pratiques et les
imageries de parenté. Dans ce contexte, malgré les principes de parenté cognatique des Andoque, leur
15

forte identification clanique favorise les tentatives d’asymétrie dans les relations entre les clans. La
descendance agnatique est associée à une plus grande agentivité en comparaison avec les parents non
agnatiques, les non-parents et les non-humains. Chez les humains, une agentivité diminuée ressemble à
des états de domination, tandis que chez les non-humains, elle peut être parallèle, mais ne pas équivaloir
à l’objectification du naturalisme. Enfin, le pouvoir est ancré dans les perceptions spatiales. Les
Andoque se considèrent comme les habitants du centre d’un monde orienté sur le cours du fleuve,
résultant dans la division de l’espace environnant en amont, plus proche de la source du fleuve, et en
aval, plus proche de l’embouchure du fleuve. En utilisant des procédures de familiarisation,
d’appropriation et d’englobement, ceux qui vivent au centre s’appuient sur des forces, des éléments et
des figures mythiques associés à la source du fleuve pour leur survie et leur prospérité parmi les centres
humains et non humains rivaux. L’englobement caractérise également la relation du centre avec
l’embouchure – un domaine affinal représentant les personnes non-autochtone. Ce cadre spatial
encapsule également les trajectoires historiques de l’esclavage, de l’extractivisme et de la préservation,
où les échanges asymétriques entre les Andoque et les agents non-autochtones redéfinissent les
dynamiques de pouvoir entre les premiers et les êtres non humains.
Nos données démontrent que l’incertitude dans l’échange avec les êtres humains et non humains rend les
asymétries relationnelles intrinsèquement précaires. La connaissance nécessaire pour établir et maintenir
ces déséquilibres est une ressource essentielle et disputée, rendue encore plus rare par un génocide au
début du vingtième siècle qui a éradiqué de nombreux sages et traditions orales. De plus, les Andoque
expriment souvent leurs inquiétudes quant à leur vulnérabilité au sein des dynamiques de pouvoir
impliquant des agents non-autochtones, des entités non humaines et même des membres de leur propre
groupe. Par conséquent, compte tenu du contexte de quasi-effondrement démographique, d’assimilation
croissante dans la société colombienne et d’une position régionale économique continuellement précaire,
cette recherche examine le pouvoir au sein d’une société connaissant une crise de pouvoir persistante.
Cette recherche contribue au débat sur le pouvoir dans les sciences sociales et la pensée politique en
soulignant la continuité entre les interactions sociales parmi les humains et celles impliquant des nonhumains dans les sociétés où ces derniers sont reconnus comme des agents. Simultanément, elle fait
progresser les études sur le continuum relationnel humain-non humain au sein de l’animisme et du
perspectivisme amazoniens, établissant le pouvoir à la fois comme le résultat et l’instrument pour un
enchaînement de relations symétriques et principalement asymétriques, et démontrant l’entrelacement

16

des dynamiques de pouvoir entre les humains et les non-humains, d’un côté, et celles entre les
autochtones et non-autochtones, de l’autre. Notre approche révèle les dynamiques de pouvoir qui
imprègnent les relations dans une sous-région amazonienne caractérisée par l'idéologie agnatique – à
savoir, le Caquetá-Putumayo – éclairant ainsi les transformations sociales et ontologiques dans l’histoire
récente de sa population autochtone. Notre analyse remet ainsi en question la perception de
l’égalitarisme souvent associée à l’Amazonie, permettant une comparaison des configurations animistes
dans le Caquetá-Putumayo avec d’autres sociétés de cette région et au-delà.

Un résumé détaillé de la thèse en français, incluant l’introduction complète et les sommaires des
chapitres, est disponible en annexe 6.

17

18

‫תקציר‬
‫במרכזה של דיסרטציה זו ניצבת השאלה כיצד תפיסות ודינמיקות כוח נבנות ופועלות בקרב האנדוקה‪ ,‬עם ילידי בצפון‪-‬‬
‫מערב האמזונס‪ ,‬קולומביה‪ ,‬בשלושה סוגי יחסים‪ :‬בקרב האוכלוסיה הילידית‪ ,‬בינה לבין הישויות הלא‪-‬אנושיות‬
‫בטריטוריה האנדוקה ובינה לבין סוכנים לא‪-‬ילידיים‪ .‬המחקר מתבסס על מיתוסים‪ ,‬היסטוריה שבעל‪-‬פה‪ ,‬ונרטיבים‬
‫ביוגרפיים שנאספו במהלך עבודת שדה אתנוגרפית בטריטוריה הילידית של האנדוקה בין אפריל ‪ 2018‬ליוני ‪2019‬‬
‫ובאמצעות ראיונות עם מהגרים אנדוקה בעיר לטיסיה‪ ,‬וכן על תצפיות של פעולות כלכליות‪ ,‬אסיפות פוליטיות‪,‬‬
‫ואינטראקציות חברתיות אחרות‪ .‬תוך הישענות על הספרות האנתרופולוגית בדבר הרצף השורר‬
‫באנימיזם‪/‬פרספקטיביזם בין יחסים חברתיים בין בני אדם ובינם לבין ישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות‪ ,‬וכן על מחקרים בנושאי‬
‫הפמיליאריזציה והאדנות )‪ (mastery‬כאופני יחסים אסימטריים באמזונס‪ ,‬אני חוקר כוח מעבר לתפקידי הנהגה‬
‫ולספירה הפוליטית הציבורית‪ ,‬ומגדירו במסגרת המושגית חוצת ההקשרים של חליפין‪ .‬מחקרי מראה שכוח מתבטא‬
‫ביכולותיהם של סוכנים אנושיים ולא‪-‬אנושיים להמיר את יחסיהם עם הזולת מחליפין סימטריים של גופים‪ ,‬יסודות‬
‫חיוניים‪ ,‬טובין חומריים ופעולה‪ ,‬ליחסים אסימטריים שמקדמים את מטרתם לייצר אנשים )‪ ,(persons‬ולמנוע את‬
‫היווצרותם של חליפין אסימטריים שמזיקים להם‪ .‬כוח מהווה הן אמצעי להתמרת קרובי חיתון )‪ (affines‬בעלי‬
‫פוטנציאל להזיק לאדם לקרובי דם )‪ (consanguines‬מועילים‪ ,‬הן תוצר של התמרה זו‪ ,‬ואף מתבטא בתנאים המקדימים‬
‫לחליפין‪ ,‬קרי‪ ,‬ביכולתו של האדם לסרב לחליפין או להשעותו‪ ,‬ומכל מקום‪ ,‬להשתתף בו בתור סובייקט מחליף‪ ,‬ולאו‬
‫בתור אובייקט מוחלף‪.‬‬
‫קורפוס הנתונים בדיסטרציה זו נוגע למגוון הקשרים בעולמם של האנדוקה‪ ,‬למן החיים הפוליטיים‪ ,‬הכלכלה והשארות‪,‬‬
‫וכלה במיתוס ובריטואל‪ .‬מבחינה מושגית‪ ,‬החליפין הנחקרים מתמיינים לשלושה תחומים‪ ,‬שמערכי הניגודים המגדירים‬
‫אותם חופפים באופן חלקי‪ :‬התחום האונטולוגי‪ ,‬תחום השארות‪ ,‬ותחום המרחב‪ .‬בתחום האונטולוגי‪ ,‬חליפין נטועים‬
‫בעקרון האנימיסטי שלפיו ישויות בעלות צורות גופניות נבדלות זו מזו חולקות פנימיות משותפת‪ .‬פנימיות דומה זו‬
‫מובילה לחליפין הומוסובסטיטוטיבי הדדי‪ ,‬שבמסגרתו אנשים מסוג‪/‬זן )‪ (kind‬אחד מוחלפים באנשים מסוג‪/‬זן אחר‪ .‬עם‬
‫זאת‪ ,‬בני‪-‬אדם בעלי כישורים ועוצמה עורכים מניפולציות אונטולוגיות על מנת לקשור יחסים אסימטריים עם ישויות‬
‫לא‪-‬אנושיות‪ ,‬שבמסגרתם הם מבצעים עמם חליפין הטרוסובסטיטוטיביים לפיצויין על חיות ניצודות באמצעות‬
‫חומרים צמחיים‪ .‬הם עורכים מניפולציות אונטולוגיות גם על מנת לנצל את העקרון ההומוסובסטיטוטיבי בפעולות‬
‫כישוף‪ ,‬שבהן הם הופכים יריבים אנושיים לחיות ציד‪ .‬מניפולציות שכאלה קשורות בעבותות לעקרון הסוכנות מדורגת‪,‬‬
‫שבא לידי ביטוי בפרקטיקות שארות ודימויים מתחום זה‪ .‬בתחום השארות‪ ,‬חרף העקרונות הקוגנטיים של האנדוקה‪,‬‬
‫ההזדהות החזקה שלהם על בסיס קלאנים אגנטיים מביאה לחתירתם לביסוס יחסים אסימטריים עם בני קלאנים‬
‫אחרים‪ .‬עקרון השושלתיות )‪ (descent‬האגנטית קשור לתפיסתה של סוכנות נעלה בקרב בני הקלאן על פני זו של‬
‫שארים לא‪-‬אגנטיים‪ ,‬אנשים מחוץ לרשת השארות‪ ,‬וישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות‪ .‬בקרב בני אדם‪ ,‬רידוד הסוכנות גובל במצבי‬
‫שליטה‪ ,‬ואילו ביחס לישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות‪ ,‬הוא מהדהד את החיפצון )‪ (objectification‬הנפוץ בנטורליזם‪ ,‬אף אם אינו‬
‫זהה לו‪ .‬לבסוף‪ ,‬כוח מעוגן בתפיסות מרחביות‪ .‬לשיטת האנדוקה‪ ,‬הם חיים במרכזו של עולם שבנוי סביב ציר הנהר‪ ,‬כך‬
‫שהמרחב מתחלק למעלה הנהר – כלומר‪ ,‬החלק הקרוב יותר למוצא הנהר – ומורד הנהר‪ ,‬קרי‪ ,‬האזורים ששוכנים‬
‫לכיוון שפך הנהר‪ .‬באמצעות פרוצדורות של פמיליאריזציה‪ ,‬ניכוס והכלה‪ ,‬בני האדם המתגוררים במרכז משתמשים‬
‫בכוחות‪ ,‬אלמנטים‪ ,‬ודמויות מיתיות שמזוהות עם מוצא הנהר כדי לשרוד ולשגשג במאבקי כוח מול מרכזים אנושיים‬
‫ולא‪-‬אנושיים יריבים‪ .‬חתירה דומה להכלה מאפיינת את יחסי המרכז עם שפך הנהר – תחום של קרובי חיתון‬

‫‪19‬‬

‫שמייצגים אוכלוסיות לא‪-‬ילידיות‪ .‬המסגרת המרחבית הזו אף תורמת להבנת התהליכים ההיסטוריים של עבדות‪,‬‬
‫כלכלות ניצול משאבים וכן פעילות סביבתנית לשימור היער והמגוון הטבעי‪ ,‬שבהם חליפין אסימטריים בין האנדוקה‬
‫לבין סוכנים לא‪-‬ילידיים מגדירים מחדש את יחסי הכוחות בין האנדוקה לבין ישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות‪.‬‬
‫ממצאיי מראים שחוסר הוודאות בחליפין בין בני אדם לבין ישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות מערער באופן יסודי את יציבותם של‬
‫יחסים אסימטריים בין בני אדם‪ .‬הידע הנחוץ ליצירת האסימטריה ושימורה מתגלה כמשאב קריטי ונתון לתחרות מרה‬
‫בין גורמים שונים‪ .‬משאב זה אף נעשה נדיר יותר בשל רצח עם בתחילת המאה העשרים שבמסגרתו חוסלו חכמים‬
‫רבים‪ ,‬ומסורות שבעל‪-‬פה נמחו לחלוטין‪ .‬זאת ועוד‪ ,‬האנדוקה מביעים דאגה ביחס לפגיעותם וחולשתם ביחסיהם עם‬
‫סוכנים לא‪-‬ילידיים‪ ,‬ישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות‪ ,‬ואף עם בני ובנות עמם‪ .‬ההקשרים ההיסטוריים והעכשוויים של קריסה‬
‫דמוגרפית‪ ,‬היטמעות בחברה הקולומביאנית ומעמד פגיע בכלכלה האזורית‪ ,‬מבהירים כי עבודה זו חוקרת כוח בחברה‬
‫ש ח ו ו ה מ ש ב ר מ ת מ ש ך ש ל כ ו ח‪.‬‬
‫מחקרי תורם לדיון הכללי על מושג הכוח במדעי החברה ובמחשבה הפוליטית באמצעות הדגשת הרצף שבין‬
‫אינטראקציות חברתיות בין בני אדם לבין ישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות בקרב חברות שמייחסות לאחרונות סוכנות חברתית‪.‬‬
‫כמו כן‪ ,‬המחקר תורם לספרות בדבר הרצף בין האנושי ללא‪-‬אנושי באנימיזם ובפרספקטיביזם באמזונס הילידי‪ ,‬שכן‬
‫הוא ממחיש את מעמדו של הכוח הן כתוצר של שרשראות יחסים סימטריים ובעיקר אסימטריים‪ ,‬הן כאמצעי לכינונן‪,‬‬
‫ומנכיח את הרצף בין יחסי הכוח בין ילידים לישויות לא‪-‬אנושיות ובינם לבין לא‪-‬ילידים באזור זה‪ .‬בנוסף‪ ,‬הגישה‬
‫המחקרית המוצגת כאן חושפת את דינמיקות הכוח המכוננות את היחסים החברתיים בתת‪-‬אזור באמזונס‪ ,‬הקקטה‪-‬‬
‫פוטומאיו‪ ,‬המאופיין באידיאולוגיה אגנטית‪ ,‬ובכך שופכת אור על תהליכי שינוי חברתיים ואונטולוגיים בהיסטוריה של‬
‫האוכלוסיות הילידיות לאזור זה‪ .‬מכאן‪ ,‬שמחקרי מאתגר את התפיסה הרווחת בדבר שוויוניות )‪(egalitarianism‬‬
‫באמזונס הילידי‪ ,‬ופותח אופק להשוואות בין התצורות האנימיסטיות של הקקטה‪-‬פוטומאיו לבין חברות אנימיסטיות‬
‫אחרות באמזונס ובחלקים אחרים בעולם‪.‬‬

‫‪20‬‬

Resumen
Esta tesis investiga la formación y manifestación de nociones y dinámicas de poder entre los Andoque,
un pueblo indígena del noroeste de la Amazonia colombiana, centrándose en tres clases de relaciones: en
tres clases de imbricaciones: dentro de la población indígena, con entidades no humanas en el territorio
andoque y con actores no indígenas. Mi análisis está basado en mitos, historias orales y trayectorias
biográficas recopiladas durante un trabajo de campo etnográfico en el territorio ancestral andoque entre
abril de 2018 y junio de 2019. Igualmente, se basa en observaciones de transacciones económicas,
asambleas políticas y otras interacciones sociales durante este período, y entrevistas con migrantes
andoque en Leticia. Basándome en la literatura antropológica sobre la continuidad entre relaciones
humanas y no humanas en el animismo/perspectivismo y sobre la familiarización y la maestría como
marcos relacionales asimétricos en la Amazonia, exploro el poder más allá del ámbito del liderazgo y la
arena política pública, definiéndolo dentro un marco conceptual transaccional. Demuestro que el poder
se manifiesta en la capacidad de actores humanos y no humanos para transformar los intercambios
simétricos de cuerpos, principios vitales, bienes materiales y acción en en sus relaciones con otros, en
intercambios asimétricos beneficiosos para la fabricación de personas, así como contrarrestar
desequilibrios adversarios. El poder surge de y facilita la conversión de parientes afines potencialmente
dañinos en parientes consanguíneos más seguros y benevolentes, y se manifiesta en las precondiciones
del intercambio: la capacidad de rechazar o suspender el intercambio y participar en la transacción como
su agente, en lugar del objeto transaccionado.
Cubriendo los campos de la política, economía, parentesco, mito y ritual, mi análisis vuelve cada vez a
intercambios ocurriendo dentro de tres dominios conceptuales cuyas distinciones son, en gran medida,
superpuestas: ontológico, de parentesco y espacial. En el dominio ontológico, los intercambios están
arraigados en el principio animista de interioridad compartida entre seres con formas corporales
distintas. Esta interioridad compartida conduce por defecto a la práctica de homosustitución recíproca de
personas de una clase por las de otra. Mientras tanto, individuos capaces participan en manipulaciones
ontológicas para crear asimetría con no humanos por medio de intercambios heterosustitutivos, en los
que compensan las presas con sustancias vegetales, o explotando la homosustitución en ataques de
brujería, transformando a las víctimas humanas en presas. La manipulación ontológica está
estrechamente vinculada con la agentividad graduada, que se manifiesta en prácticas e nociones de
parentesco. Aquí, a pesar de los principios de parentesco cognático de los Andoque, sus fuertes

21

identidades clánicas fomentan intentos de asimetría en las relaciones inter-clánicas. La descendencia
agnática se asocia con una mayor agentividad sobre parientes no agnáticos, no parientes y no humanos.
En los humanos, la agentividad disminuida se asemeja a estados de dominación, mientras que en los no
humanos, puede paralelizarse, pero no equivaler, a la objetivación vista en el naturalismo. Finalmente, el
poder está anclado en percepciones espaciales. Los Andoque se consideran viviendo en el centro de un
mundo centrado en el curso del río, resultando en la división del espacio circundante en río arriba, hacia
la cabecera, y río abajo, hacia la desembocadura del río. Utilizando procedimientos de familiarización,
apropiación y englobamiento, aquellos que viven en el centro aprovechan las fuerzas, elementos y
figuras míticas asociadas con la cabecera del río para su supervivencia y prosperidad en medio de
centros humanos y no humanos rivales. Una búsqueda similar de englobamiento caracteriza las
relaciones del centro con la desembocadura del río, un reino afín que representa a las personas no
indígenas. Este marco espacial también engloba trayectorias históricas de esclavitud, extractivismo y, en
última instancia, proyectos de preservación, donde los intercambios asimétricos entre los Andoque y los
agentes no indígenas redefinen las dinámicas de poder entre los primeros y los seres no humanos.
Mis hallazgos revelan que la incertidumbre en el intercambio con seres humanos y no humanos hace que
las asimetrías relacionales sean inherentemente precarias. El conocimiento requerido para establecer y
sostener estos desequilibrios es un recurso crítico y disputado, hecho aún más escaso por un genocidio a
principios del siglo XX que erradicó a muchos sabios y tradiciones orales. Además, los miembros del
pueblo andoque a menudo expresan sus preocupaciones sobre su vulnerabilidad dentro de las dinámicas
de poder que involucran a agentes no indígenas, entidades no humanas e incluso miembros de su propio
grupo. Por lo tanto, considerando el contexto de una casi-exterminación demográfica, la creciente
asimilación en la sociedad colombiana y una posición precaria continua en la economía regional, esta
investigación examina el poder dentro de una sociedad que experimenta una crisis de poder duradera.
Mi investigación contribuye al debate más amplio sobre el poder dentro de las ciencias sociales y el
pensamiento político al resaltar el continuo entre interacciones sociales entre humanos y aquellas que
involucran a no humanos en sociedades donde los no humanos son reconocidos como agentes.
Concurrentemente, contribuyo al conocimiento antropológico sobre el continuo relacional humano-no
humano dentro del animismo y perspectivismo amazónicos, estableciendo el poder tanto como el
resultado de, como el instrumento para un encadenamiento de relaciones simétricas y
predominantemente asimétricas. Asimismo, demuestro la continuidad entre las dinámicas de poder de

22

las relaciones humano-no humano y aquellas entre agentes indígenas y no indígenas. Mi investigación
revela las dinámicas de poder que impregnan las relaciones en una subregión amazónica caracterizada
por la ideología agnática, a saber, el Caquetá-Putumayo, elucidando así las transformaciones sociales y
ontológicas en la historia reciente de sus poblaciones indígenas. Mi análisis desafía así la percepción de
igualitarismo a menudo asociada con la Amazonía indígena, permitiendo una comparación de las
configuraciones animistas en el Caquetá-Putumayo con otras sociedades dentro de esta región y más
allá.

23

24

Keywords / Mots Clés / ‫ מילות מפתח‬/ Palabras Clave
English: Amazonia; Andoque; Animism; Economy; Environmentalism; Human-Nonhuman Relations;
Kinship; Ontological Asymmetry; Power
French: Amazonie; Andoque; Animisme; Asymétrie Ontologique; Écologie; Économie; Parenté;
Pouvoir; Relations Humains-Nonhumains
Hebrew: ‫חיה; כוח; כלכלה; סביבתנות; שארות‬-‫אנדוקה; אמזוניה; אנימיזם; אסימטריה אונטולוגית; יחסי אדם‬
Spanish: Amazonía; Ambientalismo; Andoque; Animismo; Asimetría Ontológica; Economía;
Parentesco; Poder; Relaciones Humanos-No-Humanos

25

26

Table of Contents
Page
List of Oral Sources………………………………………………………………………………

31

List of Figures…………………………………………………………………………………….

33

List of Tables……………………………………………………………………………………..

35

A Note on Language……………………………………………………………………………...

37

Glossary (Terms in Local Spanish)...…………………………………………………………......

39

Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………….

41

The Andoque and their Territory…………………………………………………………

44

Previous Research on the Andoque and Their Neighbors………………………………..

50

Power in the Social Sciences and Political Thinking…………………………………….

53

Power in Indigenous Amazonia…………………………………………………………..

58

Conceptual Framework and Argument…………………………………………………...

71

Dissertation Structure…………………………………………………………………….

74

Methodology……………………………………………………………………………...

76

Part I: Power at the Center………………………………………………………………………..

83

Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………

85

Chapter 1. The Egret Universe and Its Center……………………………………………

90

Egret of the Center………………………………………………………………..

90

Egret of the River Source…………………………………………………………

94

Egret of the River Mouth………………………………………………………….

96

On Axes, Captains, and Orphans…………………………………………………

99

Chapter 2. The Predatory Cosmos and Its Center………………………………………...

107

Elevation and Predation……………………………...…………………………..

107

Personhood, Agency, and Humanity……………………………………………...

109

Body and Speech………………………………………………………………….

115

Two Mythological Layers, Two River Systems……………………………………

119

Chapter 3. The Production of Centers……………………………………………………

121

Clan and Origin…………………………………………………………………..

121

Names and Their Powerful Bestowal…………………………………………….

125

27

Chapter 4. The Center Reemerges After the Flood……………………………………….

133

Dóñékɒi: Preferring Exchange over Predation…………………………………..

134

The Orphans, Latent Eagle, and Multiplying Tree……………………………..

141

The Making and Unmaking of Yiñékɒ’s Center…………………………………...

149

Part II: Appropriating Power from the River Source……………………………………………..

161

Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………

163

Chapter 5. The Maloca……………………………………………………………………

167

Chapter 6. The Main Cultivars…………………………………………………………...

179

Manioc………...………………………………………………………………….

179

Tobacco…………………...………………………………………………………

187

Coca………………………………………………………………………………

199

Chapter 7. Tne’túi: Power as Spirit ………………………………………………………

213

The Soul, Tutelary and Auxiliary Spirits…………………………………………

213

Omen and Dream Interpretation…………………………………………………

219

Part III: Power in a Cosmos of Multiple Centers…………………………………………………

227

Introduction………………………………………………………………………………

229

Chapter 8. The Territory and its Persons…………………………………………………

235

Creator-Persons and Site-Persons………………………………………………

237

Ño̰ ́ ifɵsi: Territory as Connectivity………………………………………………

241

Owners vis-à-vis the State………………………………………………………

243

Animist Asymmetries……………………………………………………………

252

Chapter 9. Power in Human-Nonhuman Relations………………………………………

259

Predation by Humans……………………………………………………………

259

The Ambivalence of Predation……………………………………………………

261

Predation by Nonhumans………….………………………………………………

267

Familiarizing and Mastering Nonhumans………………………………………

286

Healing: Countering Predation by Nonhumans…………………………………

303

Excursus: In and Out of the House of the Missing………………………………………………

311

Chapter 10. Power Dynamics among Human Centers…………………………………...

317

Power Dynamics in View of the Human-Nonhuman Continuum…………………

319

Predation and Influence Between Affinal Centers………………………………

326

28

De-familiarization through Incest and Sorcery…………………………………

334

Agnatic Predation and Competitive Alliances…………………………………..

345

Political Knowledge Among Centers……………………………………………

362

Chapter 11. Exchange and Subordination in Ceremonial Dances………………………

375

Critiques and Offerings…………………………………………………………

376

Agnatic and Human Asymmetries in Ceremonial Dances………………………

392

Part IV: Power Relations with the River Mouth…………………………………………………

419

Introduction………………………….………………………….………………………..

421

Chapter 12. Predation by and Familiarization of the River Mouth………………………

425

The Axe Jaguar and Other Predators………………………….…………………

425

The Seductive Dolphin……………………….………………………….………..

434

Chapter 13. Trading the Persons of the Land………………………….…………………

447

The Predatory Triangle of Extractivism………………………….………………

449

Commodification: Between Losing Pets and Trading Orphans………………….

461

Chapter 14. Environmental Action and the Encompassment of Worlds………………….

477

Nobles and Miners………………………….…………………………………….

480

My Enemy’s Friend ………………………….………………………….………..

486

Respecting Knowledge, Respecting Boundaries………………………….……..

490

Converting Money into Salt………………………….…………………………..

496

Conclusion: Agnatic Identity and Hierarchical Animism in Amazonia………………………….

503

Bibliographical References………………………….………………………….………………..

515

Appendices………………………….………………………….…………………………………

547

Appendix 1. Myths………………………….………………………….………………...

549

Appendix 2. Conversations and Tales………………………….………………………..

579

Appendix 3. Yiñékɒ’s Survivors Group………………………….………………………

591

Appendix 4. Name Giving in Ceremonial Dances………………………….……………

593

Appendix 5. Primary Keys of Andoque Dream Interpretation…………………………..

599

Appendix 6. Résumé détaillé de la thèse avec l’introduction complète en français…..

603

29

30

List of Oral Sources
A. Myths
Order of Appearance

Name

Page

M1

Coca of the Animals

549

M2

Coca of the Orphans

550

M3

Origin of the Maloca and Cultivars

552

M4

The War of the Speaking Tree

96

M5

Origin of Trade with Whites

554

M6

Origin of the Swidden

555

M7

The Orphan Pipe Blower

556

M8

False Egret and the Manguaré

559

M9

The Eagle’s Flood

114

M10

The Orphans’ Flood

560

M11

The Multiplying Tree

562

M12

The Pipe Blower Úiknñemn

562

M13

Origin of Salt

190

M14

Origin of Tobacco for Captaincy

565

M15

Origin of Tobacco for Healing

566

M16

False Egret and the Jaguars from the Stars

566

M17

Sun and Pretty

567

M18

The Peccary Head

568

M19

The Fi’du’s Yam

278

M20

The Seductive Deer

570

M21

The Pineapple-Loving Tapir

571

M22

The Origin of Dolphins

571

M23

Tofidei’s War

572

M24

Toucan and Lady Sloth

573

M25

Origin of the Carrier Band

576

M26

Origin of the Manguaré Drum

577

M27

Origin of the Fausíya Dance

402

31

M28

Origin of the Armadillo Dance

403

M29

Capybara’s Acquisition of the Peach Palm

454

B. Transcribed Conversations
Order of Appearance

Title

Page

C1

Conversation on the rubber genocide and on Dóñékɒi

579

C. Tales
Order of Appearance

Name

Page

T1

The House of the Missing (Irene)

311

T2

The House of the Missing (Raquel)

313

T3

The House of the Missing (Fisi)

314

T4

The Adventures of the Piercers

588

T5

The Tale on the Boat of Goods

433

32

List of Figures
Page
Figure 1. Map of the Andoque ancestral territory, Indigenous reserves, and national parks

46

in the Middle Caquetá
Figure 2. The manguaré monoxyl drums at Fisi’s maloca

92

Figure 3. Fisi Andoque Andoque

92

Figure 4. Men stomping on the multiplying beam at Tañe’s maloca

92

Figure 5. A Murui-Muina stone axe

100

Figure 6. Harpy eagle claws of an Andoque shaman

114

Figure 7. Map of the origin sites and ancestral territories of the different Andoque clans

123

Figure 8. Tañe Andoke Andoke toasting coca leaves

142

Figure 9. Fisi’s Maloca

167

Figure 10. Raquel’s Maloca

167

Figure 11. Tañe’s Maloca

167

Figure 12. Mario’s Maloca

167

Figure 13. Ground plan of Fisi’s maloca

171

Figure 14. A present-day materialization of Lady Beetle of Life’s mythical house

181

Figure 15. Mario Andoke Andoke picking coca leaves in his garden

224

Figure 16. Nestor Andoke Macuna burning plants for the preparation of vegetal salt

236

Figure 17. Irene Andoke Andoke

312

Figure 18. Raquel Andoke Andoke

312

Figure 19. The concentric model of the Andoque’s cosmo-social relations

317

Figure 20. Marriageable relatives from a male spouse’s perspective

335

Figure 21. Marriageable relatives from the perspective of a male spouse’s father

337

Figure 22. The incestuous relationship between Jorge and Luisa

339

Figure 23. Tañe offering tobacco to the guests who stomp on his multiplying beam

396

during a dance at his maloca
Figure 24. A Carrier Dance rod outside Fisi’s maloca

398

Figure 25. A Murui-Muina carrier band

399

33

Figure 26. The triangle of Indigenous, non-Indigenous, and nonhuman predation in the

453

Andoque territory
Figure 27. A Miraña man drying animal pelts in 1970

467

Figure 28. Lisimaco Andoke Macuna in the “Sun’s Garden”

514

34

List of Tables
Page
Table 1. Male and female members of each Andoque clan, within and without the

124

Aduche Reserve
Table 2. The two Andoque modalities of offerings

292

Table 3. Sorcery accusations circa 1920-2019 by severity and the kinship status of the

341

victim from the sorcerer’s point of view
Table 4. Gender disproportion in Andoque births

346

Table 5. Marriages contracted by Andoque members born between 1930 and 1999

347

Table 6. Marriages contracted by Andoque members born between 1930 and 1989

348

Table 7. Members of Andoque clans with primary marriages with other Andoque

354

individuals
Table 8. Proportion of children born to two Andoque parents in the five main Andoque

355

clans
Table 9. Contemporary Andoque Dances

377

Table 10. The dances of the two ritual specializations

393

Table 11. Name giving by ritual specialization

405

Table 12. Ritual prerogatives and birth order among the People of the Center

409

Table 13. Two ritual specializations in their broad context

416

Table 14. The members of the survivor group that was formed in La Palma

591

Table 15. prestigious ceremonial name givings among the Andoque from the 1930s

593

onwards
Table 16. Individuals named as “adults” in the Fausiya Dance held by Yiñékɒ

35

596

36

A Note on Language
Throughout this dissertation, I underline Spanish words (e.g., secretario, poder), except for proper
names;
I italicize Andoque words (e.g., ɵpáha, pɵ’te), apart from proper names;
And I italicize scientific names of flora and fauna (e.g., Cecropia sciadophylla).
In addition, italics are (sparsely) used for emphasis.

In transcribing words in the Andoque language, I employ the conventions developed by Jon Landaburu
(in Andoque Andoque and Landaburu, Forthcoming), and which have undergone several changes since
his first analysis of this language (Landaburu 1979). The alphabet developed by Landaburu includes 12
consonants (b, d, f, h, k, m, n, p, r, s, t, and y, as well as ñ), and 15 vowels. These vowels include nine
simple vowels, pronounced as follows:
Front

Central

Back

Close

i

ʉ

u

Middle

e

ɨ

o

Open

a

ɵ

ɒ

Additionally, there are six nasal vowels. These include the nasalized versions of a, e, i, o, and ɒ (a̰, ḛ, ḭ,
̰o, and ̰ɒ), as well as n, representing the nasalized version of the vowels ʉ, ɨ, and ɵ.
An apostrophe (’) represents glottal stop, which can follow all vowels.
The Andoque language is tonal. Vowels can carry both tones that are proper to the specific word in
which they appear, and mechanic tones, depending on the lexical combination in which the word
appears. Proper tones are marked by one accent (e.g., á), while mechanic tones are marked by two
accents (e.g., a̋).

37

38

Glossary (Terms in Local Spanish)
Ambíl. A term referring both to tobacco paste (yʉbʉ) and tobacco juice (yʉbʉdíe). Both
substances are obtained by mixing cooked tobacco leaves with different amounts of vegetal salt.
Cabildo. A modern Indigenous council elected by reserve members to mediate relations with the
State and other external institutions. The Andoque have two such councils, for each Indigenous reserve,
each one including a governor, a secretary, a treasurer, and a prosecutor.
Cacique. A maloquero and traditional leader (captain) above clan level.
Caguana. A non-fermented beverage, made with starch from bitter manioc boiled with water,
often mixed with different fruits.
Casabe. Flatbread prepared from bitter manioc.
Fariña. Toasted crumbs of bitter manioc mash.
Mambe. Coca powder, prepared from toasted and pulverized coca leaves combined with ashes of
yarumo leaves (Cecropia sciadophylla).
Mambeadero. The space at a maloca, a house, or a shack, where yarumo leaves are burned and
where coca powder (mambe) is prepared and consumed, usually during the afternoon and evening hours.
It is the main male forum for socialization. A participant is called mambeador (plural: mambeadores).
Maloca. A residential and ceremonial house, with political and economic functions that were
more pronounced before the rubber genocide. Headed by a maloquero, or captain.
Manguaré. A pair of monoxil drums, stationed at some malocas and serving for communication
and rhythm in ceremonial dances.
Manicuera. A non-fermented beverage from grated tubers of a poisonous variety of manioc.
Tipití. A tubular-like press woven from fibrous materials, used to remove the toxic cyanidecontaining juice from grated bitter manioc pulp.

These words are not underlined throughout the dissertation.

39

40

Introduction
It is thanks to the dead fish leaving the Araracuara sector that living people can enter it. After the
government-owned Satena airline company ceased operating flights to and from this village on the
Middle Caquetá River, the weekly cargo flights of merchants arriving empty from San José del Guaviare
in search of frozen fish to satiate the appetite of the citizens of Bogotá have remained the only means to
travel there from this town, which connects the Colombian Amazon to the Andean cordillera by land. It
was on one of these flights that I first landed in Araracuara one April morning in 2018, a peculiar
addition to an already motley ensemble: two Colombian workers of the National Natural Parks agency, a
Spanish missionary, a German tourist, a British employee of a human rights organization, and several
Murui-Muina residents of Bogotá visiting their home communities from which they had fled due to
threats posed by armed dissident groups. As the soldiers inspected my passport, wondering aloud what
could have brought an Israeli to Araracuara, and I inspected the Indigenous crowd gathering at a
distance to welcome the new arrivals, the senior of the two National Natural Parks workers (Parques
Nacionales Naturales; hereafter, Parques), having overheard my intention to conduct ethnographic
fieldwork among the Andoque people, cynically wished me well, saying: “They are a very hostile
bunch, they have this reputation of always refusing everything and not collaborating with anyone; all
they think about is money. Do you know they even used to mine gold?”
Having been greeted and picked up by my contacts from the Andoque Atta Ant Clan, I noted to myself
that my new hosts were not as horrible as they were depicted. However, two days later, I witnessed the
hostility to which she referred directed against her junior colleague during an assembly at the maloca
(residential and ceremonial house) of Mario Andoke, of the Deer Clan. The junior representative
unsuccessfully attempted to reach joint practical decisions concerning the team, methodology, budget
for logistics, and timetable for a wo Attarkshop aimed at formulating a “cultural plan for territorial
management” that the Andoque had previously asked Parques to support. Several participants now
accused the agency of failing to provide the required support for their reserve’s territorial expansion as
agreed, while the neighboring Chiribiquete National Natural Park had doubled in size during that period.
While some tried in vain to convince Parques’ representative to try the coca powder that they had
prepared for the meeting, others vehemently criticized his organization, challenging Parques’ right to
intervene in the Andoque’s territorial management. Levy Andoke, a university-educated reserve
member, entrepreneur and regional politician residing in Bogotá, employed a complex legal jargon that

41

was largely incomprehensible to many among his kin and other Indigenous participants. He contended
that such plans assume that Indigenous people are “traditional Indians” who only want forest
preservation and oppose development out of ecological concerns, while disregarding their present-day
economic hardships. Most other Andoque participants were only willing to collaborate with Parques if
they were paid for preservation and demanded high wages to the elders, whose knowledge on the
territory and the maintenance of relationships with its nonhuman co-dwellers would contribute to
formulating the document. After declaring that Parques considered Indigenous people as allies, the
representative finally admitted that for his organization, preservation was the end, and Indigenous
people were the means. “The Whites only give rights to trees, not to people,”1 one participant
complained to me during a break. “They want us to live like the Indians of the Apaporis: naked,
barefoot, but happy, but we have needs!” said another, referring to Indigenous groups who epitomize
“pure Indians” for the Andoque and are considered the protégés of Parques and the non-governmental
organization Gaia Amazonas. The participants inflated the budget for logistics and insisted: “We have
needs; like Parques, an Andoque only works for money.” As a result, the meeting failed to achieve its
goals.
I, on the other hand, left the meeting in high spirits, having seized the opportunity to introduce myself to
the reserve members, particularly the elders and young leaders, and obtained their consent to stay with
them and carry out my research. My self-presentation was followed by those of the elders, who occupied
seats at the mambeadero—the space where coca powder is prepared and consumed in later hours of the
day—while other men were sitting on benches to their right and left, and female participants observed
from the rear of the maloca. Fisi (“Rock’s Edge”) of the Eagle Clan was the first to present himself,
referring to himself as the cacique (captain above the clan level), and was followed by the five clan
captains. After their presentations, a peculiar silence fell, as if everyone was waiting for someone else to
speak. “What about you, Milciades?” someone addressed Levy’s father sitting on a bench to the right of
the entrance. “What about me?” said Milciades, also known by his Indigenous name Tañe (“Stationary
Sun”). “I am not a captain, nor do I have a maloca anymore.” However, this did not prevent Tañe from
later telling me, when I commented on the impressiveness of Mario’s large maloca, that his own maloca
had been even bigger. Before returning to the discussion with the Parques representative, the participants
inquired about whom I planned to work with. I managed to evade the question for the moment by stating
The term “Whites” (blancos), as used by the Andoque, refers to all non-Amerindians. I often employ this term to designate
non-Indigenous people.
1

42

that I hoped to first get to know as many members as possible by staying for two weeks in the settlement
of each clan. The participants approved of this idea and decided on a timetable for my visits to each
clan. However, one elder discreetly approached me later, expressing that if I wished to work with him,
he would not agree to my working with any other elder. While slightly taken aback, I was nevertheless
glad to have survived my first community assembly.
Therefore, a mere two days into my fieldwork with the Andoque, it was impossible to overlook the
manifold tensions that pervaded this small Indigenous society. These tensions were everywhere: in the
strained interactions with representatives of the state and environmental organizations, which were
marked by the suspicious and combative position employed by the Andoque; the ongoing competition
for prestige and knowledge among elders; the noticeable disparity in access to external resources
between Levy and the other members—and by extension, Levy’s clan and other clans; the marginalized
role of women in such assemblies, in comparison to men, and, lastly, there existed an ingrained fear,
competition, or animosity towards animals and other nonhuman entities that inhabited the forest and
river—an underlying sentiment that I could not fully grasp at that moment, yet played a significant role
in shaping the backdrop for the other tensions.
This dissertation thus explores the question: How are notions of power constructed and negotiated, and
how do power dynamics play out in different entanglements 1) among the Andoque members, 2)
between them and the nonhuman co-dwellers of their territory, and 3) between them and non-Indigenous
agents? As I will demonstrate throughout this dissertation, power is manifested in the capacity of both
human and nonhuman agents to transform their relationships from symmetrical exchanges to
asymmetrical ones across various contexts—an endeavor that is grounded in Indigenous conceptions of
kinship and space. Power stems from and facilitates the conversion of potentially harmful affinal
relatives into safer, more benevolent consanguineal kin. It is deeply anchored in spatial perceptions that
interpret predatory dynamics within a cosmos axed along a river’s course, encompassing the river
source, the midstream, and the mouth. This spatial framework also encapsulates historical trajectories of
colonial trade, exploitation, and, ultimately, efforts at preservation, where asymmetrical exchanges
between the Andoque and non-Indigenous agents redefine power dynamics between the former and the
nonhuman entities of their environment.

43

The Andoque and their Territory
Official data sets the total population within the two Andoque reserves in June 2018 at 343 individuals
(Ministerio del interior 2020). This number includes, apart from Andoque reserve residents, also nonAndoque inhabitants and some Andoque emigrants living in other Indigenous reserves and Colombian
cities, primarily Bogotá and Leticia. A survey I conducted upon my arrival in April 2018 showed that
the Andoque population living in their ancestral territory numbered 176 individuals, with an estimated
83 Andoque individuals living outside the territory, and 92 non-Andoque individuals who are members
of the Andoque reserves. This non-Andoque population represents settlers and members of other
Indigenous peoples who married into the Andoque kinship network or live in their reserves as guest
residents. In general, the Andoque population is embedded in wider networks of alliance and
coexistence with members of other Indigenous and non-Indigenous people in the larger Araracuara
sector. They also maintain relations of exchange, which vary in intensity, with Andoque emigrants. This
research primarily focuses on the experience, perspectives, and memories of Andoque individuals living
on their ancestral territory. However, it occasionally touches upon the experiences of emigrants or the
non-Andoque spouses of Andoque individuals insofar as their experiences are relevant to the themes
discussed in this dissertation.
The Andoque are part of the larger cultural complex of the Indigenous peoples living in the CaquetáPutumayo interfluve and self-identifying as “People of the Center,” together with the Féénemɨna (or
Muinane), Bora, Miraña, Nonuya, Ocaina, and peoples speaking Murui-Muina dialects (Nɨpóde, Bue,
and Mɨnɨka), previously known as the Uitoto.2 Unlike these neighbors, whose languages divide into two
linguistic families, the Andoque speak an isolated language.3 The name Andoque is an exonym of
Murui-Muina origin (Adokɨ), meaning either “People of the Axe” (Thomas Griffiths, pers. comm.,
October 2021), or “People of Upriver” or “Mountain” (Landaburu 1979, 13 n.1; Echeverri 2022, 35 n.5).
The endonym Pɵɵ Síɵ́hɵ concords with the former interpretation, alluding to the stone axes that the
Andoque found in subterranean deposits in their territory and traded with neighboring peoples prior to
the arrival of non-Indigenous people with their metal tools. Throughout this dissertation, I will employ
the exonym as it is the name currently used by the members to refer to themselves while speaking
In this dissertation, I refer to individuals and groups of the Murui-Muina using the specific ethnonym provided by the cited
ethnographer or mentioned interlocutor. However, if they refer to these groups or themselves as Uitoto/Witoto/Huitoto, I
maintain this terminology in direct quotes or speech, while, in indirect speech and my own narrative, I use “Murui-Muina.”
3
Jolkesky (2016, 284–85) identifies a genetic relation between the Andoque and Urequena languages, but the latter, once
spoken along the Putumayo river, became extinct during the nineteenth century.
2

44

Spanish, which is the language most commonly used in both daily and political contexts, including the
surprising majority of mambeadero sessions and spaces for the ritual consumption of coca; “Andoque”
(or “Andoke”) is also the most common last name of Andoque members.
The Andoque ancestral territory encompasses the land south of Tapir River (Ḭtɵse, or the Caquetá),
extending from Spawning River (Ḭ ́’pá̰se, colloquially known as Monochoa River) in the west to Drawing
River (Hḭ’ḭse, also called Quinche River) in the east, and Green River (Pasḭse, also referred to as
Cahuinarí River) in the south. North to the Caquetá, it covers the area enclosed between Plantain Leaf
River (Kɒ́’kɒpuse) and Oropendola River (Kɒtise), located east to Otter River (Oédise, colloquially
known as Yarí River), and the area stretching between Salt River (Ñɒ’Kɒse) and the Caquetá. To ensure
clarity while respecting the significance of local nomenclature, I refer to minor rivers by the English
translations of their Andoque names, while for the main rivers—Caquetá, Yarí, and Cahuinarí—I use
their commonly known names.
The Andoque population currently inhabits two Indigenous reserves established on this territory: 1) the
Indigenous reserve Andoque de Aduche on the north bank of the Caquetá, which extends over an area of
188,466.17 hectares (after its expansion in December 2020; Resolution 033/1988, Accord 030/2004,
Accord 140/2020), and 2) the Andoque de Aduche “Special Management Zone” within the Predio
Putumayo pluri-ethnic Indigenous reserve, covering an area of approximately 211,180 hectares south to
the Caquetá and centered around Macaw River (Áduse)4 (Resolutions 030/1988 and 057/1989).

4

Commonly transcribed Aduche, this river gave its name to the reserve and the special management zone.

45

Figure 1. Map of the Andoque ancestral territory, Indigenous reserves, and national parks in the Middle Caquetá. Design:
Gadiel Levi

The climate and botanical indicators of the Andoque’s ancestral territory correspond to the definition of
humid tropical forest (Holdridge et al. 1971, 43). Annual precipitation ranges between 3000–4000 mm,
with a high percentage of rainfall during the rainy season between April and July, and the dry season
reaching its peak between December and February. Temperatures oscillate between 24–26°C, and the
relative humidity ranges between 85–90% (IDEAM 2010). The territory is situated approximately 150300 meters above sea level and consists of four major geomorphic units: the flood plain of the Caquetá
River, a white-water river; the flood plain of Amazonian-origin clear and black-water rivers, which
represent all the other streams and rivers in the Middle Caquetá; the tertiary sedimentary plain; and the
hard rock formations mainly consisting of plateaus of Paleozoic sandstone (Duivenvoorden and Lips
1993, 150). Each zone is home to distinctive soil types and plant communities—riparian vegetation and
palm swamp forest in the Caquetá alluvial plain; tall, high biomass terra firme forest dotted with
saltlicks and marsh and palm swamps in the tertiary sedimentary plain, and low, dense forest, caatinga,
and savanna vegetation on the sandstone plateau (Griffiths 1998, 25–26).

46

Like other People of the Center, the Andoque society consists of patrilineal clans. Currently, Andoque
members belong to eight clans—Eagle, Sun, Deer, Atta Ant, Beetle, Spix’s Guan, Mauritia, and
Anaconda—of which only the first five are considered viable, as the others include only women or
childless men. Before the enslavement, atrocities, and genocide committed by agents of the Peruvian
Amazon Rubber Company (or Casa Arana) in the early twentieth century, the Andoque population was
estimated at 10,000 individuals (Whiffen 1915, 59), and during our conversations Andoque elders
mentioned as many as 35 clans from that period.
Akin to neighboring People of the Center, kinship terminology among the Andoque presents similarities
with both the Eskimo and Hawaiian types (Karadimas 2000b; londoño Sulkin 2012, 160–67; Lucas
2019, 163–65). Like the Eskimo system, the Andoque distinguish between parents and their siblings but
not between patrilateral and matrilateral relatives. Additionally, like the Hawaiian system, they employ
different terms for real siblings and classificatory ones (cousins), although the terms for the latter
represent a variation on the terms for the former (e.g., ḭ́ ekó ’ɵɵ for a same-sex cousin, meaning “poor
sibling”). Typical of the Caquetá-Putumayo, Andoque kinship differs from the Dravidian type prevalent
throughout Lowland South America, which also entails absence of prescriptive marriage rules and
justifies their consideration as a semi-complex society that, on the surface level, contains only negative
marriage rules not to marry relatives. However, data shows a tendency to marry immediately beyond the
circle of incestuous relations and thus renew endogamous alliance after several generations (Gasché
1976; Karadimas 2000b; Lucas 2019, 158–63).
Residence is patrilocal, and a husband may pass a period of one year or more of bride service with his
wife’s family—an ideal which seldom materializes today in practice. Andoque members most
commonly live in nuclear family stilt-houses in settlements corresponding to patrilineal descent,
consisting of several brothers, their wives (who are, for the most part, non-Andoque), and children. Few
families live in malocas—longhouses that in the past sheltered entire lineages and adjunct personnel and
functioned as economic, political, and ceremonial units—and others use their malocas for cooking, coca
preparation in the mambeadero, and general activities throughout the day, while sleeping in adjacent
houses. The Andoque malocas host meetings with outsiders, as in the opening vignette, and they—or
small maloquitas sheltering men’s mambeadero spaces—serve as the social centers of the settlements in
which they are located. Andoque members reside in seven settlements (veredas) along the Caquetá and
Macaw Rivers, as well as in the large pluri-ethnic settlement of Araracuara in the Indigenous Reserve

47

Andoque de Aduche on the northern bank of the Caquetá River. Additionally, several Andoque families
live in the settler village of a corregimiento status, Puerto Santander, which faces Araracuara on the
southern bank of the Caquetá. This village is built on the Andoque ancestral territory but is not
considered part of the Predio Putumayo Indigenous Reserve.
The Andoque’s ritual and daily practices, cosmological principles, and ways of knowing and engaging
with plants and animals allow them to be largely classified as “animists” according to Philippe
Descola’s (2005) scheme of four modes of identification or ontological regimes. According to his
definition, members of animist collectives tend to perceive similarity between themselves and all or
most entities in their surroundings on the level of interiority (subjectivity, agency, mental and emotional
states, social norms, etc.), while recognizing dissimilarities on the plane of physicality (bodily forms and
principles, and external manifestations). This mode of identification is diametrically opposed to the
modern Western “naturalist” dispositions, which acknowledge similarities between all entities on the
level of physicality while denying them in the realm of interiority. There is no equivalent in the
Andoque language to the English (and Spanish) word “animal” to refer to all faunal beings except
humans. Bei is the general term for fish, which are also counted among the dú’u ño̰ḛ (“water persons”)
along with reptiles (such as arrau river turtles and caimans) and dolphins. Hiɵfo is the general term for
birds, while ḭsu classifies all terrestrial animals resembling humans in their habitat above ground. This
category includes both game animals such as the tapir and predators like the jaguar, as well as monkeys
(which are also doɨsua, “animals of above”), and the armadillo and land turtle (which are also yakafi
síɵ́hɵ, “armored ones”). It excludes terrestrial birds (ñó̰ʼifoa, “land birds”), serpents (na̰yuni síɵ́hɵ,
“biters”), and earthworms and other animals living within the earth (ñó̰ʼiño̰ḛ, “earth persons”).
Competing with humans for space and resources, the ḭsu category’s members, collectively, are the
subject of more elaborate conjectures concerning their cultural traits and social norms and institutions,
paralleling those of humans.
Similar to neighboring People of the Center, the Andoque’s livelihood is based on itinerant horticulture
and the cultivation of key crops such as bitter manioc, coca, and tobacco, hunting, and fishing. They
differ from other Indigenous Amazonians in consuming coca powder (a practice shared only with the
Tukanoan and Arawakan groups of the Vaupés-Lower Caquetá Rivers), in preparing tobacco as a paste
or liquid (unlike these and other groups in their vicinity), in their non-possession of native alcoholic
beverages and in their elaboration of the manicuera drink from a poisonous manioc variety (Echeverri

48

2022, 35–36). Another significant aspect of their livelihood is participation in the regional cash
economy. This participation involves occasional wage labor and primarily revolves around the sale of
local harvests and products to settlers and merchants. The Indigenous population of the region has
engaged in trade with non-Indigenous agents and their Indigenous middlemen from downriver (today’s
Brazil) since the seventeenth century (Pineda Camacho 1985) and participated in all the region’s
economic bonanzas, mostly led by non-Indigenous agents. The first documented economic boom in the
region was the slave trade, stretching from as early as the seventeenth century until it was superseded by
rubber tapping at the turn of the twentieth century. The Indigenous population first extracted rubber for
Colombian bosses and later under the Casa Arana, which employed genocidal practices until leaving the
region in the 1930s. This activity nonetheless continued in more humane conditions until it finally ended
in the 1990s. Its decline, beginning in the 1970s, precipitated Indigenous participation in the animal pelts
boom of the 1970s, commercial fishing from that decade onwards, cocaine production in the 1980s, and
gold mining in the 2000s. The surge of environmental projects starting in the 1990s, with the Andoque’s
involvement, represents another regional economic boom. This includes the carbon offset deals that took
off in the 2020s after the conclusion of my fieldwork.
The participation in the regional extraction economy is part of a larger process in recent decades,
whereby the Andoque have been drawing closer to national society. In 1938 and following Colombia’s
expulsion of Peruvian troops and rubber bosses, the state founded the Araracuara Penal Colony on the
north bank of the Caquetá, which served as a catalyst for the development of the settler village Puerto
Santander. During that decade, Catalan-Spanish Capuchin fathers founded boarding schools (also called
“orphanages”) in La Chorrera and La Pedrera, with a handful of Andoque youth attending the latter.
More substantial schooling began with the foundation of the missionary boarding school in Araracuara
in the 1970s (initially located in Puerto Santander), which prohibited the use of Indigenous languages.
Later, community schools with bilingual pedagogic principles were founded after the 1991 Constitution,
which recognized Colombia’s ethnic and cultural diversity. Despite the availability of bilingual
education, the combined effect of schooling, the continuous presence of settlers in Andoque territory,
and marriages with non-Andoque individuals resulted in the decline of their native language among
people under 50 years old and the rise of Spanish.

49

Previous Research on the Andoque and Their Neighbors
The People of the Center stand out within the Indigenous Amazonian landscape due to some of the
historical processes and ethnographic traits mentioned earlier. The first process is the rubber genocide.
Many Indigenous populations across Amazonia endured severe exploitation, forced labor, and brutal,
often deadly, abuses by rubber barons and tappers during the two rubber booms from the 1870s to the
1940s. However, the genocidal practices and reign of terror by Casa Arana in the Caquetá-Putumayo
sub-region were particularly destructive (Nugent 2018, 13), leading to the complete annihilation of
certain Indigenous groups, a drastic decline of all others, including the Andoque, and the displacement
of entire populations (Pineda Camacho 2000). Among the societies that reconstituted and revitalized
their cultures after the expulsion of the Peruvian agents and troops, there remains a pronounced notion
of disconnection from their pre-genocide histories (Echeverri 2010). Nevertheless, many among the
People of the Center, including the Andoque, continued to extract rubber in the aftermath of the
genocide, sometimes working with ex-employees of Casa Arana, whose descendants, such as the fish
merchants operating flights into the Araracuara sector, still have a considerable impact on the local
economies and societies of the Caquetá-Putumayo sub-region.
A second particularity concerns kinship. Contrary to the typical lack of unilineal features across
Amazonia or their non-combination with an ideological emphasis on descent principles (S. Hugh-Jones
1993, 95–96), the People of the Center’s patrilineal clan identities and patrilocal residence patterns
combine with an agnatic ideology, which is at odds with their simultaneous cognatic consideration of
both patrilateral and matrilateral relatives as kin. The agnatic emphasis is crucial for understanding the
particular form that slavery—a now recognized Indigenous Amazonian practice dating back to the preColumbian era and relevant also in extra-colonial contexts (Santos Granero 2009b)—took among the
People of the Center before it was superseded by rubber exploitation. While the main mechanism for
producing slaves in Indigenous Amazonia, for either domestic service or trade with non-Indigenous
agents, was the capture of individuals in raids (ibid),5 in the People of the Center’s history, it was the
very principle of agnatic descent that produced slaves—or, in local terms, “orphans.” These were
individuals who, during times of warfare and sweeping epidemics that exterminated entire populations,
found shelter in, or otherwise married into the malocas of their affinal or matrilateral kin. Not belonging
The Bolivian Yuqui case stands out in that, according to David Jabin’s (2016) reconstruction, the slaves of this society were
initially Siriono captives. Over time, these captives were replaced by distinct slave lineages—possibly the descendants of
Siriono captives—who were deliberately nurtured and raised in ways that perpetuated their status as Others.

5

50

to the clan of their new captain, they held a lower, servile status in relation to the latter and his clan
members and could eventually be traded as slaves for externally manufactured goods (Echeverri 2022;
Karadimas 2001; Lucas 2021).
Another characteristic of the People of the Center, closely linked with their agnatic ideology, is the
special status they accord to mythology and the esoteric dissemination of key myths within the
population. Unlike some Amazonian societies, such as the Achuar, where the knowledge of mythology
is in principle open to all yet elicits a general lack of interest or is downplayed in comparison with
ritualized expressive forms that nonetheless draw on it (Descola 1986, 239, 248), the People of the
Center hold mythical narratives in high regard and restrict their knowledge to their respective clans or to
other relatives who have proven their commitment and discretion. This is especially true for the origin
myths of clans, which serve, to a certain extent, as totemic principles for their respective members—who
draw on them for help and inspiration in moments of crisis—as well as any other story that recounts the
origin of specific practices, such as maloca construction, coca preparation, dance organization, and the
performance of cures and spells (Londoño Sulkin 2000, 329–30). These stories serve as a charter, not in
the plain Malinowskian (1926) sense of affirming or challenging territorial rights and claims to status
and ritual prerogatives, as in the origin stories of the Tukanoan groups of the Vaupés River (S. HughJones 2019b), but in Pierre-Yves Jacopin’s (2010) adaptation of the term to the broader mythology of
the region, channeling agency from one episode to another until the final episode delegates it to today’s
humanity—the narrator and listeners who are now in a position to reenact the mythical feats. Similar to
the Tuaknoan political economy of knowledge described by Stephen Hugh-Jones (2010; 2019b), among
the People of the Center’s competing patriclans, the power imbued in myths leads to their preferential
transmission within the clan.
The mythology, ritual life, and practices of the People of the Center inhabiting the Middle Caquetá have
been documented by scholars and explorers as early as the first half of the nineteenth century, with
scattered references and observations concerning the Andoque (Spix and Martius 1981 [1823]; Crévaux
1883; Robuchon 2010 [1907]; Whiffen 1915; Tessmann 1999; Preuss 1994). Research dedicated to the
Andoque began with the linguistic study carried out by Jon Landaburu (1979), who introduced the
younger anthropologists Roberto Pineda Camacho and Manuel Antonio Guzmán to the Andoque
community. Guzmán wrote his undergraduate thesis on their social organization and participation in the
rubber economy in the 1970s (Guzmán Gonzalez 1971), and Pineda collaborated with Landaburu in a

51

masterful anthology and commentary on Andoque mythology (Landaburu and Pineda 1981; Landaburu
and Pineda 1984), alongside publishing solitary works on the Andoque’s history, economy, adoption of
foreign technologies (primarily the metal axe), and the ways in which all these dimensions of their lived
world are represented in myth and ritual (Pineda Camacho 1975; 1979; 2014). Pineda and Landaburu’s
insightful and meticulous works on the Andoque, as well as Pineda’s later studies on the history of the
Casa Arana and the Caquetá sub-region (Pineda Camacho and Llanos 1982; Pineda Camacho 2000;
1985), remain significant bibliographical resources for understanding Andoque society, and I drew on
them extensively to complement my own data on cosmology and to gain a comparative perspective on
myth narration across historical contexts.
Landaburu and Pineda represent a generation of scholars who inaugurated scientific anthropological
research of the People of the Center between the 1960s and 1980s, alongside Jürg Gasché, Mireille
Guyot, Horacio Calle, and Jean Patrick Razon. They engaged in salvage documentation of their
mythologies and focused on these peoples’ impressive reconstruction process following the devastating
genocide and displacement in the early twentieth century. Later research during the 1990s among the
People of the Center emphasized a gap between the cannibalistic discourse of pre-genocide times and
contemporary sociality and politics of inter-ethnic collaboration, stressing Indigenous discourse that
portrayed humans as inherently superior, as opposed to nonhuman beings who embody immorality. This
research mainly concerned the Murui-Muina and Féénemɨna (Echeverri 1997; Griffiths 1998; Londoño
Sulkin 2000), although we may also consider Landaburu’s analysis of the Andoque’s post-genocide
mythological transformations and Monica Espinosa Arango’s (1995) insistence on an Andoque
communal striving for conviviality as part of this irenic trend in research. By contrast, the publications
of Dimitri Karadimas (2005), Oscar Iván García (2018) and María Luisa Lucas (2019) among the
Miraña, Murui-Muina, and Bora, respectively, bring to the fore the predatory cosmology and more
hierarchical tendencies still very much alive between captains and orphans, and record dynamics of
power that are essential for the present dissertation.
During the 2000s and 2010s, several anthropology students carried out short-term research among the
Andoque. Nelsa de la Hoz Melo (2005) discussed one ceremonial dance (Tu’si, or Multiplying Tree),
from the point of view of her hosts from the Sun Clan, while Levy Andoke Andoke (2011) from this
clan wrote his undergraduate thesis on the Andoque’s post-genocide recuperation process, primarily
focusing on the memory preserved by his own clan members and his mother (from the Eagle clan). Lena

52

Yanina Estrada Añokazi (2017) provided in her doctoral dissertation a panoramic outlook on the
Andoque people, including limited analysis of their perception of the territory, based, to a certain extent,
on interpretations by Murui-Muina interlocutors. Finally, Else Audren (2017) artfully captured in her
Master’s thesis the Andoque’s dilemmas, internal frictions and cosmological aspects surrounding gold
mining and the attempts to legalize it in 2016, despite the short duration of her fieldwork in that year.
These publications provided me with further ethnographic details, myth versions, and information on the
Andoque people in recent decades. However, none of them reflects a major ethnographic description of
the Andoque society in its full complexity by weaving together cosmology and history, kinship and
economy, ritual and politics—which is precisely what this dissertation attempts to achieve by studying
the evasive yet context-transcendent notion and dynamics of power.
Power in the Social Sciences and Political Thinking
Power is one of the most debated concepts in the social sciences and political thinking, with its
definitions varying across time, place, political convictions, and methodological concerns. To discuss
power in Indigenous Amazonia, it is necessary to provide a concise overview of several definitions,
distinctions, and points of contention that have shaped this ongoing debate, and which I discuss here in a
thematic order, rather than the chronological order of their emergence.
The first significant aspect is power’s observability and the sphere where it should be sought. In
conventional definitions, power must be seen and have discernible outcomes within specific contexts,
particularly decision-making in the political sphere, to be considered as such (e.g., Dahl 1957). In
contrast, critical scholars tend to view power as a hidden force which is most effective when least
observable, operating informally and transcending specific contexts, without even requiring explicit
action (Lukes 2021, 5, 79–84). “Secrecy lies at the very core of power,” wrote Elias Canetti (1981, 290),
pointing out the asymmetry of knowledge that is constitutive of power, as the powerful person sees
through others without allowing others to see through them (ibid, 292). Uncovering power structures
thus represents an act of resistance. What Foucault regarded as a historical transition from the display of
power to power over individuals who are displayed (1977), David Graeber defined as coevality of two
modalities of power (2001, 95). From an economic perspective, Graeber further discussed money as
embodying a generic agency and dangerous power precisely when it is not “tamed” by coins that grant it
visibility or displayed through valuable objects (ibid, 103).

53

The second aspect is the distinction, in Steven Lukes’ terms, between “power to” and “power over.” The
former refers to general agency, encompassing the capacity, facility, or ability to act and influence
outcomes, while the latter denotes a relation of domination that is inherently social and characterized by
asymmetry, and can be regarded as a subspecies of “power to” (Lukes 2021, 39, 74, 78). This distinction
can be traced back to the Latin language, which distinguishes between potentia and potestas, and was
developed by Baruch Spinoza, for whom “potentia signifies the power of things in nature, including
persons, to exist and act. Potestas is used when speaking of being in the power of another” (ibid, 78).
Focusing on power as domination, Spinoza further classified the means to secure compliance to
mechanisms concerning the subordinate’s body, such as physical bondage or actual or potential
violence, and symbolic means targeting their mind, such as causing fear and deception (ibid, 91–92).
This division brings us to the third aspect—the distinction between power and violence. Similar to the
mind/body duality, the differentiation between power and violence cannot be separated from the
culture/nature divide, which permeates Modern Western thought, delineating epistemology from
ontology, the symbolic from the physical, social constructs from natural facts, and the political and
historical from the given and timeless (Descola 2013; Latour 1993). As physical force, violence is
abrupt and immediate, while power unfolds over a certain extension of space and time that serves more
readily as substrate for symbolic complexities (Canetti 1981, 281–82). The contrast between a “natural”
violence and a “socialized” power is implied in Max Weber’s work, where violence is glossed as a given
and the focus is placed on the social arrangements considered legitimate for its exercise, particularly the
state (e.g., Weber 1968). This perspective is echoed by Alessandro Passerin d’Entrèves (1967), who
considered power as a form of violence that is institutionalized or qualified by law, deriving its
legitimacy from the Hobbesian social contract. On the other hand, Hannah Arendt sought to further
radicalize the distinction between these two notions in her work On Violence, where she defined power
as the property of groups, which concerns the ability of the group members to act in concert (1969, 40–
44), while portraying violence as instrumental, capable of being carried out also by individuals. Whereas
power preserves the consent that brought the social laws into existence, violence aligns with natural
strength, which the implements of violence are designed and used to multiply and can finally replace
(ibid, 46). Arendt further distinguished both violence and power from authority, which involves
unquestioning obedience based on respect for the person giving the order or the office they hold (ibid,
5). Violence is unpredictable, because “while the results of men’s actions are beyond the actors’ control,
violence harbors within itself an additional element of arbitrariness; nowhere does Fortuna, good or ill
54

luck, play a more fateful role in human affairs than on the battlefield” (ibid, 4). This recalls the potential
of violent actions to provoke equally destructive retaliation from their victims, unlike more enduring
forms of power and domination which are based on respect and consent (either genuine or based on
deception). However, as demonstrated by Caroline Ashcroft (2021), a comprehensive examination of
Arendt’s complete works reveals a more complex interplay between power and violence, where violence
can also contribute to the constitution of the political sphere. This interplay resonates with the oscillation
identified by Walter Benjamin (1996) between “lawmaking violence,” which establishes a new law, and
“law-preserving violence,” which enforces an existing law. In other words, and unlike a natural fact,
violence can only be understood through its connection to law, just as the law can only be understood in
relation to violence.
A fourth important point of contention in scholarly debates over the concept of power has revolved
around whether power is essentially repressive, dispossessing and restricting those on whom it is
exercised in various physical, procedural, or ideological measures and to different extent, thereby
inhibiting their resistance and confrontation with the powerful (Bachrach and Baratz 1962; Gramsci
1977), or also encompasses productive and disciplinary dimensions, shaping the actions of individuals
and channeling their agencies toward different ends (Foucault 1977; 1980). The latter approach is
exemplified by Michel Foucault’s influential concept of subjection or subjectivation, which refers to the
constitution of individuals as subjects in a double sense, as agents with specific dispositions and as
subordinates to power (1980, 60).
Foucault’s work has also prompted a significant shift in the social sciences and political thought, moving
away from conceiving power as possessed by groups or individuals who exert it at will upon others,
toward considering power as a constitutive dimension of social relations themselves. This dimension
infuses social relations with an asymmetrical balance of forces, generating various forms of domination
and subordination among individuals who, in turn, are constituted by power (Garland 1990, 138).
However, notwithstanding this multiplicity and pluri-directionality of forces—where all subjects are
constituted by different forces yet maintain a level of freedom to resist—games of power can solidify
into fixed states of domination, wherein particular individuals and groups acquire and preserve (i.e., they
possess) a superior capacity to control and “produce” others (Foucault 1994, 283).
The fifth aspect of power to be discussed here is its comparativeness, which is interrelated with the
objective of its exercise, and, thus, with notions of value and hierarchy. This interrelation underlies the

55

common understanding that individuals or groups differ from one another in their respective abilities to
maximize their attainment of their objectives while minimizing efforts. In such comparisons, one person
would be considered more powerful than another if the former can bring about outcomes that are more
“significant” than those produced by the latter (Lukes 2021, 79–85). “But how do we judge the
significance of outcomes?” Lukes asks, and then replies: “The most natural answer is: we look at their
effects upon the interests of the agents involved” (ibid, 85). The concept of interests directs us to what is
important in people’s lives, and thus the greater ability of one person or group to further their own
interests and affect the central or basic interests of another may indicate their superior power (ibid, ibid).
However, the question of what is basic or central to people’s lives is controversial. Is it, for example,
their economic situation, their personal security and lives, or the status and prestige of themselves or of
their group (however this is defined)?
Therefore, the comparative aspect of power is inseparable from the multiplicity and contention of
values. As Friedrich Nietzsche argued through his concept of “will to power”—that force driving
organisms to preserve their lives and enhance them through growth—value judgments can themselves
be the stakes of power struggles, leading to people’s attempts to make prevail the value judgments that
are favorable to them (Nietzsche 1968, 400). One of these value judgments, Nietzsche contended, is the
value of “truth,” highlighting the interconnection between power and knowledge. Nietzsche thus put
forward the perspectivist idea that beings strive to compel others to accept as a norm their perspective on
the world—i.e., the amount of reality they can grasp, become masters of, and utilize for their service
(ibid, 480–81).
On the other hand, from a structural point of view, Louis Dumont demonstrated how values can be
hierarchically ranked. In general, hierarchy is a principle of gradation of elements in an ensemble in
relation to that ensemble (Dumont 1980, 66). Values and other elements become superior to others when
their relation to the whole is such that they come to encompass the other values and elements that
contradict them, like the right hand encompasses the left, the category of “Man” encompasses women,
or purity encompasses political power in the Indian context that he explored (ibid, 75–79, 239– 45;
2013). Although Dumont perceived power through a Weberian lens as legitimate force (idem 1980, 153)
and, on that basis, distinguished it from hierarchy, which is essentially a feature of religion or
cosmology, one can suppose that power may also be involved in determining the hierarchy between the

56

components of a whole or manipulating the definition of that whole in such a way as to allow for a
certain hierarchical arrangement of its components.
It is noteworthy that the power to which these scholars refer is exercised by human beings, who alone
are considered social agents endowed with a will or the capacity to manipulate or be manipulated by
symbols. On the other hand, nonhuman entities, from inanimate things to animals and plants to spirits
and gods, have traditionally been considered in modern Western “naturalist” sciences (including the
social sciences) as either natural forces that may limit human action or be acted upon by humans; as raw
materials to be transformed by humans into material products; or as symbolic constructions to be
invented by them, particularly in the case of spirits and gods (Descola 2005, 114–65, 302–06). In this
way, the ultimate stake in the inter-subjective struggle between the master and slave in G.W.F. Hegel’s
parable is domination that would reduce the latter into an object, i.e., a non-agent (2019, 91–98). Marxist
thinking reflects an instrumentalization of exerting power over nature for the exercise of power among
people, or the continuity between these two forms of control. In Karl Marx’s political economy, the
exercise of power among humans is based on their unequal appropriation of nonhuman objects, such as
land, livestock, and other means of production, and control over the process whereby these are
transformed into products (1976). The thinkers of the Frankfurt School later factored in the effects of the
instrumental rationalizing tendencies that emerged during the Enlightenment to argue that the human
pursuit of control and mastery over nature in modernity eventually extends to the domination of human
beings by other human beings (Horkheimer and Adorno 2002). On the other hand, we observe a
different approach to the agency of nonhuman entities in Actor-Network Theory, where nonhuman
“actants” can, like human agents, participate in the course of action and even hijack it, interfere and
affect social relations between individuals, and consolidate or undermine social structures and power
asymmetries (Latour 2005, 63–86). However, even the recognition of nonhuman agency by ActorNetwork Theory seems to refer more to these entities’ “power to” than their “power over.” With a focus
on cosmology—once the researcher incorporates the ontological premises of the society under scrutiny
to their analytical toolbox—David Graeber and Marshall Sahlins (2017) suggested that human power
and authority in both state and stateless societies emulate the ruling cosmic powers, with figures
reflecting the “stranger-king” pattern incorporating and capitalizing on such meta-human forces.
Graeber and Sahlins’ non-separation of humanity from nonhumanity in studying political power is vital
for the study of Amazonia, where the extension of agency and “power over” beyond humans renders

57

many of the other definitions and conceptualizations of power dynamics presented above inadequate or
in need of significant revision. Incorporating nonhuman agency is crucial not only for exploring the
specific dynamics in human-nonhuman relationships but also for understanding inter-human interactions
in a socio-cosmos perceived by its inhabitants as inherently affected by the actions and potentials of
nonhumans.
Power in Indigenous Amazonia
Anthropologists of Indigenous Amazonia have addressed some of these dimensions of the concept of
power, increasingly factoring in native perceptions of nonhuman agency. However, as we will see, the
main approaches in this literature have tended to highlight socio-political and ontological egalitarianism
characterized by symmetrical relationality.
The study of power in this region was largely pioneered by Pierre Clastres’ (1989) Society against the
State. Despite assuming that power is inherent in social life (ibid, 23), Clastres primarily focused on the
formal political function of the chief in his study of power (or its absence). While he admitted that the
chief exercises power in a peaceful mode through persuasion and reconciliation (ibid, 30), Clastres’
analysis was rooted in the perception of power as essentially repressive. Based on evidence that
Amazonian chiefs cannot legitimately exercise violence on group members or expect obedience outside
the bounded context of war expeditions, Clastres concluded that “the space of chieftainship is not the
locus of power,” and that the chief of the tribe “is not a chief of State” (ibid, 205–06; see also Lowie
1948). Challenging common assumptions that the absence of a state structure in “primitive societies”
stems from an evolutionary failure to develop it, Clastres proposed that these societies intentionally
rejected power (understood as political authority or even sovereignty) just as they rejected nature,
because they “apprehend power as the resurgence of nature” (ibid, 44). Amazonian societies deliberately
place chiefs outside the social fabric to reduce their power to impotence, relegating them to a mere
formal position, and ensure separation between speech, violence, and wealth. They achieve this through
three asymmetrical flows of exchange between the chief and other society members—words, goods, and
women—that are opposed to the symmetrical exchange among “ordinary” society members. On the one
hand, the chief is obligated to provide his society members with abundant oratories, but this speech
amounts to empty formulae without reciprocation or even attention by other members. In addition, he
faces constant demands to share his goods in a way that prevents him from accumulating wealth. On the
other hand, the chief receives more women than other members, resulting in an asymmetry that leaves

58

him indebted to other men (ibid, 27–47). The external position of the Amazonian chief to his society,
combined with the embeddedness of economy in society, characteristic of other primitive societies, also
rules out the existence of a political economy (ibid, 199). Though Clastres does not explicitly state this
point, it appears that the balanced exchange of words, goods, and women among “ordinary” members
generates the power inherent in society as a collective rather than being possessed or exerted by
individuals. The sole function of this power, it seems, is to restrict the chief. We are thus left with a
somewhat Arendtian perception of power without appropriate analysis of the actual mechanisms through
which this power is constituted or made effective. Furthermore, this analysis concerns only the relations
among the male members of the group, whose power over women—who only figure here as objects of
exchange—is taken for granted.
Clastres’ provocative model was widely criticized in Amazonian ethnography but, to a large extent, it
has also laid the foundation for subsequent discussions on power in this region. Similar to Clastres,
Waud Kracke (1978) examined power among the Kagwahiv within the formal political sphere,
observing power that does not operate through repression and coercion, but relies on persuasion.
However, contrary to Clastres, rather than incompatibility between chiefs and their societies, Kracke
demonstrated how groups coalesce and form around leaders, defining leadership as a set of functions
that promote group formation and inhibit fission. These functions include the “commotive function,”
which motivates a group to work toward a common goal, and the “arbitrational function,” which
encourages conviviality and adherence to the group’s informal code of conduct. The types of leaders
who perform these functions are referred to as dux and rex, respectively (ibid, 84). Drawing on
psychological models, Kracke explored different leadership styles and motivations behind followership.
Embedding these models in the Kagwahiv kinship landscape, Kracke asserted that leaders achieve this
position primarily by giving their daughters to men and thus holding a matrimonial debt that guarantees
the following and labor of the sons-in-law for varying periods of time (ibid, 35–37, 235–36). This
finding challenges Clastres’ notion of indebtedness of the chief to this group through polygynous
chieftainship (ibid, 14).
Kracke’s observation that the scarcity of women makes a man’s father-in-law the only person with a
sound basis to exercise control over him (ibid, 37) leads us to Peter Rivière and Terence Turner’s works
on Amazonian political economies, which, contrary to Clastres’ model, do not overlook or take for
granted the power that men exert over women. Rivière (1983) criticized Clastres’ argument that

59

Amazonian economies are not political because they do not involve the accumulation and appropriation
of surplus wealth. Drawing, among other things, on Turner’s observation that in central Brazil political
economy is based on social rather than material production and reproduction (T. Turner 1979, 168),
Rivière argues that, given the short supply of human labor in Guiana, wealth depends on the successful
manipulation of human resources and their incorporation into the community. Although he focuses on
the prestige and wealth of the group leader, Rivière’s analysis provides us with generational and
gendered mechanisms that reveal wider power dynamics, taking us beyond the circumscribed sphere of
leadership. In these broader dynamics, elder men appropriate the products of their sons-in-laws, and men
in general appropriate the surplus value of female production for their own political advancement (ibid;
see also Rivière 1987).
Contrary to Rivière, Turner goes beyond the exploitative aspect of this political economy to also explore
its productive dimensions, wherein the surplus product is not objects or services but persons as
symbolically objectified forms of value that reproduce social hierarchy (T. Turner 2003). The hierarchy
to which Turner refers is the encompassment of women’s labor by men’s labor, and of the matriuxorilocal household by the segmentary units, themselves encompassed by communal organization that
elaborates ceremonies controlled by men (ibid, 15–18; see also Lorrain 2000, on whose approach he
draws). The fact that these political economies involve persons and not goods sets limits to
accumulation, as willing persons can leave a leader, and communities tend to split beyond a certain
demographic size (Rivière 1983, 352–53), which results in revolving hierarchies, rather than fixed ones
(T. Turner 2003, 20).
The emphasis on hierarchy refutes the view, held by Clastres and reflected elsewhere in the literature, of
sweeping Amazonian egalitarianism (e.g., McCallum 1990; Overing 1989, 161–62). In Michael
Heckenberger’s (2005) study of the deep temporality of Arawak political power in the Xingu, hierarchy
emerges as a crucial discursive foundation for the operation of power. Heckenberger’s research, drawing
on both archaeological evidence and contemporary ethnography, reveals that the chief does not possess
any coercive power, although he can undoubtedly influence and control the actions of others (ibid, 330).
Xinguano power, according to Heckenberger, involves the control over the construction and operation of
human bodies (ibid, 312). This power is hierarchical, as it is graded along genealogical principles and
organized as a concentric and pyramidal model (ibid, 63–65). It is also spatialized, as it is performed by
individuals in the village plaza and invested in this site, which is itself perceived as a person embodying

60

buried ancestors and taking part in a ranked regional system of village-persons. Based on archaeological
data, Heckenberger hypothesized that such networks of settlements amounted in pre-Columbian times to
galactic polities (ibid, 124–26).
The spatial embeddedness of hierarchy is central to another Amazonian sub-region, located closer to the
Andoque. I am referring to the Arawakan-Tukanoan system, extending from the Rio Negro and Vaupés
rivers to the Apaporis and Lower Caquetá. In the Tukanoan case, mythology recounts the successive
emergence of the ancestors of the sibs, which constitute the different language groups of this sub-region.
These ancestors traveled upriver in a primordial anaconda-canoe and exited it at spots along the river in
order of seniority, with senior sib ancestors disembarking more downstream than junior sib ancestors.
These myths serve as an ideal model with different levels of practical applications, for land occupation
and usufruct rights of river segments. According to the model, the elder the sib, the lower downstream it
is positioned, resulting in a greater abundance of fish yield and more significance access to regional
exchange networks (Goldman 2004, 90–91; C. Hugh-Jones 1979, 33–40; S. Hugh-Jones 1993; Vidal
1999). This hierarchy also manifests in leadership and ritual prerogatives, involving varying degrees of
power to engage in exchange with nonhuman beings and influence them to ensure the well-being and
reproduction of the human group.6 The geographical proximity between the Arawakan-Tukanoan system
and the People of the Center also translates to certain similarities in social organization, such as
patrilocality, a strong ideology of agnatic descent, and notions of hierarchy. Therefore, I return to this
sub-region several times as a privileged comparative case to elucidate my arguments.
The embeddedness of hierarchy in myth leads us to the agency of nonhuman entities and the power
required to engage in successful exchange with them, as well as the power and prestige derived from
such exchange. Philippe Descola and Fernando Santos Granero criticized Clastres for disregarding the
sphere of ritual and communication with nonhuman entities, where shamans play a key role, and through
which they acquire prestige and political influence (Descola 1988; Santos Granero 1986). Both authors
argue that in Amazonian societies, shamans can gain greater political influence than titular chiefs to
orient group members, because they possess scarce ritual knowledge allowing them to exert control over
reproductive processes and material or symbolic resources on which the group relies. Various
ethnographers have documented how shamans contend with powerful spirits and animals whose powers
The Arawakan societies vary in their degree of conformity to the myth of the ancestral anaconda-canoe and the spatialized
hierarchy enshrined within it, although such hierarchy is manifested in the aforementioned political and ritual realms
(Andrello 2006; Bourgue 1976; Hill 1985; van der Hammen 1992).

6

61

are connected to their predatory capacities, as well as how they draw on the powers of such nonhuman
entities to cause, cure, or prevent diseases and other misfortunes (e.g., Déléage 2009; Langdon and Baer
1992; Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975). In these accounts, we observe the dual depiction of power as both the
property of specific shamans and apprentices (e.g., Langdon 1992b, 47), on the one hand, and the
property of cosmic networks, or “global energy systems” (Langdon 1992a, 13), on the other. The
shaman’s interactions with these energy systems turn him into “a living embodiment of power”
(Langdon 1992b, 59)—a description falling closer to a Foucauldian concept of power as the property of
social relations themselves. In Chapter 7 of this dissertation, I describe a similar phenomenon, where
Andoque members refer to the central concept of tne’túi, which I provisionally gloss here as “power as
spirit,” as both imparted from the cannibal god Sı̰ ́di and the property of the predatory networks that he
oversees, and the temporary possession of individuals, representing their ability to access Sı̰ ́di’s
predatory networks and tilt them (and Sı̰ ́di himself) to their benefit.
However, one seldom finds detailed accounts of continuities between such shamanic inter-specific
exercise of power and the exercise of power among human beings, Indigenous and non-Indigenous alike
(e.g., S. Hugh-Jones 1994; Santos Granero 1993), to which Graeber and Sahlins refer, and which is a
central focus of this dissertation. Furthermore, the term “shaman,” as this Siberian-borrowed concept is
commonly used in the literature, often conflates ritual specialists who operate on various scales, employ
distinct knowledge and methods, and communicate with various classes of nonhuman entities. S. HughJones (1994) differentiates these practitioners as “horizontal shamans” and “vertical shamans,” two ideal
types that respectively correspond to egalitarian or hierarchic aspects or ideologies within the societies
where they operate (sometimes in tandem). This distinction also illuminates the political economies of
knowledge of ranked Amazonian societies—e.g., in Northwest Amazonia (Andrello 2010; S. HughJones 2019b)—where the knowledge essential for “vertical shamanism”—which garners political clout
and prestige—is shrouded in secrecy and transmitted within high-ranking patrilines, as opposed to the
more experimental and accessible knowledge of “horizontal shamans.”
Descola’s call to reconsider shamans as political agents falls within the broader intellectual endeavor
seeking to align the object and method of research according to Indigenous Amazonian notions of
society and social relations. These notions concern not solely human subjects, but also extend to
nonhuman entities, such as the myriad animals, plants, and spirits with whom individuals communicate
in both ritual and everyday occasions (Descola 1986). The approach put forward by Descola and other

62

anthropologists associated with the Ontological Turn led to a call to revise modern Western definition of
politics as a sphere where only human beings count as moral subjects and social and political agents.
Instead, this approach proposes a notion of “cosmopolitics,” which acknowledges that nonhuman
entities may also occupy these positions (de la Cadena 2010). Before we proceed to “cosmopolitical”
accounts of Amazonian power, it is crucial to briefly digress and delve into the kinship dimension of
Amazonian ontology.
The Ontological Turn in Amazonian anthropology has heavily drawn on the study of kinship in the
region, and the association presented among many Indigenous peoples, with varying degrees and in
different contexts, between matrimonial exchange and predation. According to Descola (1998), the
regional predominance of cognation and Dravidian kinship turns consanguinity and affinity into
relatively abstract logical operators for considering and acting towards a wide array of entities and
situations. Affinal relations are particularly notable in this respect because, owing to their unstable and
often conflictual nature, they serve throughout the region as “an excellent metaphorical support to
qualify relations with the exterior” (ibid, 36). The consideration of affinity as analogical to predation is a
key component of Descola’s revival and redefinition of the concept of animism as a mode of
identification where the elementary categories structuring social life are used to organize the relations
between human and nonhuman beings (Descola 1996, 87–88). This definition would later be generalized
to consider animism as a mode of identification characterized by the premise that all, or most, beings of
the cosmos are endowed with continuous and commensurate interiorities (subjectivity, agency, mental
and emotional states, social norms, etc.), as opposed to discontinuous and incommensurate physicalities
(bodily forms and principles, and external manifestations) (Descola 2005).
On the other hand, Eduardo Viveiros de Castro frames the relation between affinity and predation in
terms of continuity, rather than analogy, with affinity representing a specific actualization of the generic
relational model of predation (1993, 184–86). Furthermore, nonhuman entities as well as humans with
whom one cannot marry—categorized as “potential affines”—represent affinity more than virtual
affines (people with whom one can marry), real affines (with whom one has married), and, evidently,
consanguineous kin, precisely because actual alliance or its prospects introduces consanguinizing
elements that dilute affinity (idem 2001; Viveiros de Castro and Fausto 1993). This interpretation is
rooted in Viveiros de Castro and Carlos Fausto’s critical adaptation of Dumont’s model of Dravidian
kinship to Amazonian reality through another Dumontian concept—namely, that of hierarchy, as

63

discussed earlier. In contrast with the “equistatutory” structure of Asian Dravidianate, where the
categories of affinity and consanguinity stand in balance to each other, in Amazonian Dravidianate,
affinity encompasses consanguinity at the supra-local level, with consaguine kin living far from ego
being “affinized” and treated as affines, particularly in matters of politics, ritual, and cosmology that
transcend the local community. On the other hand, affinity is encompassed by consanguinity at the local
level, where real affines are treated as consanguines (a process referred to as consanguinization, or
familiarization) (Viveiros de Castro 1993; 2001; Viveiros de Castro and Fausto 1993). In other words, in
Amazonia affinity “stands as the given dimension of the cosmic relational matrix, while consanguinity
falls within the scope of human action and intention” (Viveiros De Castro 2001, 19). Here it is crucial to
recall that, unlike most Amazonian societies (including the Tukanoan and Arawakan neighbors, who
share an agnatic ideology), the Andoque and the other People of the Center do not adhere to the
Dravidian kinship model. However, similar to the Warao—who also deviate from this model—the
Andoque share some of the concentric dimensions of Vivieros de Castro and Fausto’s model (Allard
2010, 98–99). On the local level, they show a certain tendency to consanguinize affines, even though the
strong patrilineal identities in the region lead them to differentiate between consanguineous and affinal
co-residents. More importantly, Andoque cosmology closely aligns—perhaps even more than that of
their neighboring People of the Center—with the prevalent Amazonian concept of inherent meta-affinity
and potential affinity as a “determined alterity” mediating relationships with the outside (Viveiros de
Castro and Fausto 1993, 151). As discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, their cosmology features two
interconnected spatial systems centered around a river course, with potential affines for those living at
the river’s midpoint inhabiting the two extreme points—the river source and mouth—of each system.
Notably, Andoque mythology frames commerce with Whites as a marital exchange, a perspective that is
either more pronounced or distinct compared to their neighbors (Griffiths 1998, 247; Karadimas 2005,
360–67, 171–75; Lucas 2019, 372–73; see Chapter 12).
Despite employing the concept of hierarchy between categories, Viveiros de Castro’s overall
theorization of Amerindian perspectivism, onto which his argument that affinity is a specific
materialization of a generalized predatory relationality can also be mapped, does not acknowledge the
possibility of asymmetries. According to Viveiros de Castro, Amerindian perspectivism is based on the
premise that animals, spirits, and other nonhuman entities see themselves and other members of their
kind as human, while they perceive the entities they prey on as peccaries or other animals preyed upon
by humans, and the entities that prey on them as jaguars, spirits, or other entities that represent human
64

beings’ predators (1998). Perspectivism implies multinaturalism, as the equally human cultural
representations produced by various persons of diverse species constitute as many
worlds/natures/ontologies as the number of specific bodily forms from which these representations are
projected. For example, a given liquid may be seen as blood in a human world but perceived as maize
beer in a jaguar world (ibid, 477–78). In this sense, the same relation between two entities that one of
them may perceive as predation may be perceived by the other as sexual relations, i.e., an affinal
alliance. Such may be the case when a human being mistakes a forest spirit for another human and
engages with it in a social activity befitting two humans, rather than a human and nonhuman. In such
situations, the human party behaves in such a way because it is “overpowered by the non-human
subjectivity, passes over to its side, transforming himself into a being of the same species as the
speaker” (ibid, 483). To my knowledge, this instance stands as the only occurrence where Viveiros de
Castro addresses the notion of power or asymmetry of relations in his perspectivist model, momentarily
bringing it closer to Nietzsche’s understanding of this term as the attempt of each being to impose its
perspective on reality on others, driven by each being’s will to power. By contrast, such overpowering is
central to the present dissertation.
In their critique of the symmetry bias in new studies of Amazonian animism and perspectivism, Luiz
Costa and Carlos Fausto refer to Viveiros de Castro’s general perspectivist/multinaturalist project as “a
disjunction of perspectives that are never reducible one to the other, nor to a global figure of the One”
(2010, 99). They continue, “Viveiros de Castro’s perspectivism thereby corresponds to the politics of
Pierre Clastres—it is a religion against the state” (ibid, ibid). In other words, excluding the asymmetrical
nature of the father-in-law/son-in-law relationship throughout Amazonia (Fausto 2008, 350), marital
exchange and predatory relations between two subjects are potentially symmetrical, as both parties can
equally hijack each other into their kinship network or reality. In the case of actual predation, the game
animal can counter-prey on its predator in the form of illnesses or other misfortunes (Viveiros de Castro
1998, 472), and Viveiros de Castro’s model does not allow for any in-built measures to disperse this
ambiguity.
Costa and Fausto equally criticize Descola for downplaying asymmetrical relationality and hierarchy in
animist societies, notions whose existence he acknowledges, in the case of the Indigenous Americas,
only in societies he defines as “analogical,” where all human and nonhuman entities present
discontinuities in relation to both interiority and physicality (2010, 99). For the Southeast Asian

65

contexts, other scholars have noted the compatibility of animism with hierarchical structures. There, the
universalized subjectivity among beings is not segmented horizontally across bodies, but is graded
vertically, such that each being possesses a different level of spirit or potency (K. Århem 2015b, 25).
Consequently, domesticated animals, which are considered lower in this hierarchy, may be manipulated
and sacrificed to protect human lives (Sprenger 2015, 34–35; see also Descola 2023). Returning to
Amazonia, Costa and Fausto question Descola’s argument that animism is congruent only with
symmetrical modes of relations, where the parties hold equal ontological status and the relations
between them may be reversed, such as exchange, gift, and predation (Costa and Fausto 2019, 213).
Conversely, they call for exploring the possibilities that the idiom of mastery, prevalent throughout in
Amazonia, holds for understanding both contemporary regional animism and state-like structures of
domination that were more common in Amazonia prior to European conquest (Costa and Fausto 2019,
100; e.g., the structures explored by Heckenberger 2005).
Fausto and Costa’s works on mastery and its closely related notion of familiarization are crucial for the
present discussion of Amazonian notions of power. Firstly, these works reflect the common regional
ontological principle concerning the social agency of nonhuman beings and their commensurate
interiority with that of humans. Secondly, they introduce significant elements of asymmetry into the
symmetrical model of predation/alliance. In the case of the notion of familiarization, or, more precisely,
familiarizing predation, Fausto does this by recasting the regional idiom of affinal relationality into
political-economic terms, considering familiarizing predation as the “main schema of appropriation in
Amazonian symbolic economies” (Fausto 1999, 937). In this process, the appropriated other, who is
typically considered an affine—whether an in-marrying spouse, a newborn child, the dead enemy’s
spirit, or animals hunted or captured as pets—is endowed with the affects and dispositions of the
captor’s consanguineal group (ibid, 939; 2007, 502). This process implies reducing any danger of
predation or other form of hostility by the transformed patient toward the transforming agent and their
kin and converting the patient’s behavior into one that would be beneficial toward them. Fausto and
Costa point to the asymmetry of familiarization, which converts the symmetrical meta-affinal processes
of marital and predatory exchange into meta-filial relations modeled after vertical consanguinity ties and
complements them in the Amazonian production of kinship (Fausto 2008; Costa and Fausto 2019;
Fausto and Costa 2021; 2022).

66

The conversion of symmetry into asymmetry takes place through the idiom of mastery, which points to
the master’s ability, by determining the direction of familiarization, to align the pet’s agency to their
own, thereby becoming a magnified person, a “plural singularity.” Mastery is scalable, as human and
nonhuman masters can own other persons, material and non-material items (myths, dances, or spells), or
places and species (Fausto 2008; Costa 2017). The Amazonian pet-master dynamics represents the
subjectivating form that Hegel’s master-slave dialectics assumes in this region, where none of the parties
is reduced to an object (Fausto and Costa 2021, 5). The pet keeps its agency and subjectivity, and it is
precisely this alterity that serves to magnify the master. However, and although familiarization and
mastery reflect greater asymmetry than marital alliance and the act of inter-species predation, the nonextinguishment of the pet’s agency means that these relations are also potentially inversible, as the pet
can familiarize its master and incorporate their agency and vitality to its own, rather than the other way
around (Costa and Fausto 2019). Nonetheless, this inversibility should not be viewed as a simple
relational reversal between two stable parties, as the measures and effects of familiarization and mastery
leave traces on the parties, participating in the very constitution of the “animist subject” (ibid, 214–15).
This echoes Foucault’s conceptualization of power as subjectivation, which appears in regional
ethnography in Santos Granero’s treatment of power as the agent’s capacity to form and transform the
subjectivity of the patient, or to extend their own subjectivity to that of the patient (Santos Granero
2009a), and in Harry Walker’s description of the Urarina’s processes of subject formation through
chains of asymmetrical companionships between different agents, human and nonhuman alike (baby and
placenta, a person and manioc beer, a shaman and a plant, etc.) (2013). Walker’s study also leads us
back to the relations between Amazonian power and leadership, as he concludes that since Indigenous
notions of autonomy preclude any possibility of coercion by the leader, leadership relies on the ability to
inspire and mobilize others. Therefore, real power in Amazonia involves the capacity to form selves and
social groups to begin with, i.e., to form subjects that could be inspired and mobilized (ibid, 214).
However, Fausto and Costa’s model represents the specific regional modality of the general notion of
subjectivation and the way it is articulated with both concrete and abstract structures of kinship and
dynamics of predation in the region. Furthermore, the proliferation of asymmetries in relations among
humans and between them and nonhumans in Andoque discourse and practices, coupled with their
pronounced focus on masters and notions of ownership, renders this model particularly pertinent for this
dissertation’s interest in power dynamics. In Andoque, the notion of mastery is encapsulated in the noun

67

ño̰, which literally means “person,” and which I render throughout the dissertation as “owner-person” to
distinguish it from other kinds of persons. This term is particularly revealing when the “pets” in question
are nonhuman entities and abstract things, like a myth, dance, or spell, as it implies that the
master/owner of that entity or thing is its personification: their agentive, human-like aspect. Within this
relationship, the inferior party is identified by one of two terms that imply varying degrees of predatory
agency, submissiveness, and alienability: ḭéna̰, or “pet,” and ’ihɵ́ɵ, which means “orphan.” The former
term typically refers to a being of another species or bodily form accompanying and assisting its master,
while the latter designates a subordinate and alienable affinal relative adopted by the master. The multiscalarity and context-transcending ability of Fausto and Costa’s model make it an advantageous
framework for uncovering continuities across various instances of power exertion, as well as the
contradictory forces that sometimes operate within Andoque reality.
Another useful aspect of this model is the emphasis on commensality as a central practice
complementing predation in the creation of persons and groups. This should be understood within the
context of an Amazonian cosmos where differences among beings are based on physical rather than
inner attributes, hence kinship is actively produced through the fabrication of bodies (Vilaça 2002).
Here, the direction of feeding introduces asymmetry, supplanting the fed person’s previous kin
attachments with a new consubstantiality with the feeder (Fausto 2007a; Fausto and Costa 2013). This
aspect underscores the usefulness of the gift perspective for the study of Amazonian societies, based on
the gift-like qualities of the substances consumed. The relatively limited exploration of the gift paradigm
in Amazonia has been attributed to the “homosubstitutive” logic prevailing there, where things cannot
stand for persons as they do in transactions objectified as “gift exchange” in Melanesia, where gift
theory has evolved (Descola 2001; McCallum 1989). However, S. Hugh-Jones has demonstrated the
relevance of the gift paradigm for understanding the secret flute cults and the ceremonial, as well as
ongoing exchanges in the Tukanoan-Arawakan complex of Northwest Amazonia, where we observe
homologies between body parts and substances, on one hand, and artefacts and natural species, on the
other (2001; 2013). By adopting Marylin Strathern’s conceptualization of “gift exchange” as mediated
exchange—where a detached part of person A passes from them to person B—or unmediated
exchange—where A directly works on B—to displace a prior relation registered in B (1988, 178–79,
292), Hugh-Jones contends that in exchanges in Northwest Amazonia, different aspects of the donors’
identities are objectified in the items they transact. This feature reemerges in barter trade throughout
Amazonia (S. Hugh‐Jones 2013, 371), and underpins the familiarizing dimensions of feeding, as
68

discussed above. The gift paradigm is pertinent to the current study for two reasons. First, because trade
is essential to the Andoque ethos and objects often serve as metonyms for persons. Second, because gift
exchange establishes hierarchies and relations of domination among individuals through the exchange of
non-equivalent gifts (Gregory 2015, 13–14; Mauss 2002)—a dynamic most evident in the Andoque’s
sharing of ritual substances.
This literature review furnishes the components necessary to propose an analogy between
alliance/predation and familiarization and mastery, on the one hand, and violence and power and
domination, on the other. Like alliance/predation, violence reflects symmetry in that its exercise is likely
to result in less sustainable control and domination over its object over time. Unless complemented with
symbolic manipulations or other repressive means, violence exercised by one party can escalate into a
brawl or duel, which reflects a wider symmetry between two parties. While modern Western thinking
tends to view violence as closer to nature than domination, and, therefore, akin to physical force, as part
of the given plane of reality, alliance/predation is perceived in Indigenous Amazonian as the inherent
fabric of cosmo-sociality between members of different groups and species, before the elements
participating in them are appropriated into personal or collective bodies (social groups and species). In
other words, while both violence and alliance/predation pertain to the given plane of reality in each
ontology, what this plane constitutes varies across ontologies.
Conversely, familiarization and mastery involve the manipulation of bodies and symbols to form more
lingering forms of asymmetry and control whereby one party’s agency is aligned to that of another. In
this regard, they resemble various forms of domination, such as the legitimation of violence by law,
hegemonic discourse, or decision-making procedures. Like these latter forms of domination,
familiarization and mastery are also actively produced or constructed, as opposed to the given plane of
reality. However, here again it should be noted that the constructed plane of reality varies across
ontologies. While the three examples of domination that I mentioned may be glossed as “social” or
“cultural,” familiarization and mastery target primarily the patient’s body (the plane that in modern
Western thinking would be regarded as “nature”), as they aim to disconnect the patient from the
generalized affinal fabric and connect it with the bodily form and dispositions of the master as its metaconsanguine.
The final approach to the notion of power in Amazonia that I will examine here is that of Steven
Rubenstein, which represents a combination of human-nonhuman communication, political economy,

69

and psychoanalysis. In his works on power among the Shuar, Rubenstein demonstrated, first, how the
relations that individuals establish with warrior souls in visions magnify their agency to fight and
exchange with other human and nonhuman beings, and, second, how the circulation and/or accumulation
of this and other forms and signs of power by Shuar individuals, representative organization, and nonIndigenous institutes in different periods reflect and create asymmetrical relations among them (2007).
Furthermore, Rubenstein (2012) introduced a complex model based on the works of both Clastres and
Jacques Lacan to explain how Shuar visions involving nonhuman entities both constitute a subjectivity
which is fundamentally different from a bourgeois one and produce personal power that is not translated
into political domination. While drawing on Clastres’ argument on the Amazonian disjunction between
violence and speech to explain the inexistence of power as coercive authority among the Shuar,
Rubenstein explained the formation of Shuar subjectivity by recourse to Jacques Lacan’s distinction
between the Real, Imaginary, and Symbolic, and his theory concerning the mirror stage. Lacan argued
that in this stage a child growing in a Western or bourgeois society internalizes his own self-image and
is initiated into the Imaginary register of reality—which consists of images people form of themselves
and of others. This internalization is a critical stage in the process whereby the symbolic register—the
part of reality that enters into language—colonizes the real, which is the part of reality that has hitherto
resisted language. Conversely, Shuar individuals do not enter the Imaginary through a mirror stage but
through the visions of encounters with nonhuman beings who represent subjects other to themselves,
experiences they encounter from early childhood. This inauguration of the imaginary leaves vast
territories of the Real that are not colonized by the symbolic but rather entail the colonization of the
latter by the former (ibid, 51, 54). While these unmediated visions serve to magnify their power and
agency, people come to identify language as the realm of misrecognition, resulting in a stark divide
between power and speech (ibid, 52). The loss of the warrior spirit gained in visions through sharing the
vision with other people in conversations signals a dissonance between sociality with nonhumans and
sociality with humans, as well as a disjuncture between the acquisition of power and its performance
(ibid, 56–57). Emphasizing the link between power, opacity, and secrecy, Rubenstein argues: “Power
was derived not from a coordination of the Imaginary and the Symbolic (whether it be ‘God’ or ‘the
People’) but rather from a coordination of the Imaginary and the Real” (ibid, 66; see also idem 2007,
369).
While thought-provoking, the model laid out by Rubenstein is only marginally relevant for
understanding Andoque power dynamics, because of the Andoque’s bigger emphasis on an ideology of
70

descent, downplaying of uxorilocal bride service, and, most significantly, lack of employment of
hallucinogenic substances (at least at the present). However, I borrow from Rubenstein the cue to
engage Lacan’s framework concerning the three registers of reality in an analysis of power. This will
serve me to propose the hypothesis, in Chapters 9 and 12, that various nonhuman entities referred to as
fi’du in Andoque or diablo in Spanish, as well as money and cash as opposed to specific externally
manufactured goods, are considered particularly potent and threatening because they belong to
territories of the Real register of reality that have not yet been symbolized through names and myths,
and, in this way, tamed. Juxtaposed with Rubenstein’s works, this hypothesis can serve, in due course,
as a basis for comparing forms of power across Amazonia, which falls outside the scope of the present
dissertation.
Additionally, Rubenstein’s work is an inspiring effort to engage in symmetrical analyses of Indigenous
people’s interactions with both the “traditional” nonhuman world and modern non-Indigenous
institutions, such as the Market and State, as well as Indigenous ones, particularly representational
organizations. His writing thus represents one strategy for bridging the gap between political-economic
approaches and ontological ones in Latin American anthropology (Lazar 2022), amid increasing
critiques against the latter approach for flattening ethnographic complexities, neglecting historical
changes, and privileging authoritative voices to reproduce ontological discourses opposed to nonIndigenous ones, which portray future utopias yet are often irrelevant for “real-world” problems (Bessire
and Bond 2014; Graeber 2015; Nadasdy 2021). In exploring the power dynamics occurring in the
Andoque’s interactions with both nonhuman and non-Indigenous agents, my research also aims to
overcome this divide.
Conceptual Framework and Argument
This dissertation examines the notions of power of a specific Amazonian society—namely, the Andoque
people—and explores the intricate dynamics of power within this society, as well as between Andoque
members and other human and nonhuman agents. I do not define power in terms of coercion, nor do I
privilege searching it in the realm of leadership or the public political domain (e.g., community
assemblies or representative organizations). Instead, I conceptualize power within the framework of
exchange, as one’s ability to transition from symmetrical movement of bodies, vital principles, material
goods, and action in exchanges between beings, to asymmetrical movement of these elements that
benefits one, while counteracting adversarial asymmetries. This definition implies that power also

71

manifests in the preconditions of exchange: the capacity to refuse or suspend exchange and to participate
in the transaction as its agent, rather than the transacted object. Inevitably, we must define “benefit,” or
the objective of these exchanges. In broad strokes, this objective would be one’s affirmation and
enhancement of life, as captured by Nietzsche’s “will to power,” or, in more Amazonianist terms, the
production of persons (Fausto 1999, 936–37; T. Turner 2003, 11).
Conceptualizing power within an exchange framework does not imply that it is necessarily harmonious;
indeed, predation represents a hostile form of exchange. More broadly, in analyzing various instances of
trade and gift giving, I interpret these activities through the lens of predatory logics. Furthermore, the
dimension of symmetry and asymmetry must be evaluated against the overall goal of producing persons.
Therefore, predation is potentially symmetrical in that, without familiarizing his game, the hunter risks
being assimilated into the animal’s society instead of using the prey to sustain his own life and produce
kin. Conversely, trade can be asymmetrical if the items exchanged only helps one party in achieving
these goals, while harming the other.
My focus in this dissertation rests on the capacity of agents—leaders and ordinary members alike, along
with nonhuman entities as perceived by the Andoque, and collectives such as clans or the entire
Andoque people—to reshape horizontal relations of predation and alliance into vertical relations of
familiarization and mastery, where they control exchange and align the agency of others to their own.
While spanning the fields of politics, economy, kinship, myth and ritual, my analysis of Andoque power
dynamics can be narrowed to exchanges within three conceptual domains and sets of distinctions, which
sometimes overlap but are distinguished here for explanatory purposes: ontological (humanity vs.
nonhumanity), kinship (agnatic and cognatic consanguinity, and affinity), and spatial (river source,
middle of the river, and river mouth).
In the ontological domain, exchanges are rooted in the animist principle of shared interiority among
beings with distinct bodily forms. This shared interiority leads to a default reciprocal substitution of
persons of one kind for those of another. Meanwhile, capable individuals engage in ontological
manipulations to create asymmetry with nonhumans by enforcing heterosubstitutive exchange, in which
they compensate for game with vegetal substances, or exploiting homosubstitution in sorcery assaults,
transforming human victims into prey.
Ontological manipulation is closely related to graded agency, which becomes apparent in kinship
practices and imagery. Here, despite cognatic principles, the strong clan identity fosters attempts at
72

asymmetry in inter-clan relations. Agnatic descent is associated with higher agency over non-agnatic
kin, non-kin, and nonhumans. In humans, diminished agency (e.g., in orphans) resembles states of
domination, while in nonhumans, it can parallel—but does not equate to—the objectification seen in
naturalism.
Finally, my analysis demonstrates how the Andoque’s notions and dynamics of power intricately
intertwine with their perception of space. The Andoque, both as an ethnic group and as distinct clans,
consider themselves as living at the center of a world axed upon the river’s course, resulting in the
division of the space surrounding this people (and each individual clan) into upriver, closer to the river
source, and downriver, nearer to the river mouth. The key “power as spirit” previously mentioned,
tne’túi, originates from the river source and the predatory capabilities attributed to the mythical affinal
relatives inhabiting this cosmic region. The center and the people living at the center draw upon this
power for survival, protection against competing human and nonhuman centers, and overall well-being
and prosperity, through diverse procedures of familiarization and appropriation that seek to encompass
the river source, together with its mythical heroes and ritual elements. A similar pursuit of
encompassment characterizes the center’s relationship with the river mouth—an affinal realm
representing non-Indigenous people, who historically approached the Andoque territory from that
direction. I explore the numerous strategies the Andoque have employed over time to harness the forces
originating from the river source in order to familiarize the river mouth, dispose of the objects and
capacities associated with it, and ensure that exchanges with agents downstream do not lead to perilous
imbalances in the dynamics among various centers in their own territory.
The aspects of ontological manipulation, graded agency, and encompassment are hierarchical features of
the Andoque’s animism whose achievement relies on knowledge of myth and ritual procedures.
Individuals and groups draw on this knowledge to establish and maintain asymmetries with nonhuman
beings in a bid to extend and maintain similar imbalances in their interactions with other human beings
(Andoque, non-Andoque, or non-Indigenous), and vice versa. However, the uncertainty in exchange
with both kinds of beings renders these asymmetries, as well as the additional asymmetries that people
aim to establish through them, inherently precarious.
My research contributes to the broader debate on power within the social sciences and political thought
by highlighting the continuum between social interactions among humans and those involving
nonhumans in societies where nonhumans are recognized as agents, thereby furthering the works of

73

Actor-Network theorists, as well as Graeber and Sahlins. Concurrently, it advances the exploration of
the human-nonhuman relational continuum within Amazonian animism and perspectivism, pioneered by
Descola and Viveiros de Castro. My approach reveals the power dynamics permeating relationships in
an Amazonian sub-region characterized by agnatic ideology and associated kinship conceptions and
practices—namely, the Caquetá-Putumayo. Building on Fausto and Costa’s theories of familiarization
and mastery in Amazonia, my research establishes power as both the outcome of and the instrument for
an enchainment of symmetrical and predominantly asymmetrical relationships. I demonstrate how these
processes are integrated into space and embodied in myth and narrative, underscoring their significance
across various contexts, including extractive and preservationist economies. My study thus challenges
the perception of egalitarianism often associated with the region, allowing for a comparison of the
animist configurations in the Caquetá-Putumayo with those in other areas, as studied by Århem and
Sprenger.
Dissertation Structure
The structure of this dissertation reflects the constitutive role of space in defining Andoque notions and
dynamics of power. It is organized into four parts, each dedicated to specific components of space as
perceived by Andoque members. The first part starts with the concept of “center,” demonstrating how it
is interwoven with notions of power. It links the multivalence of the concept of “center” with two
registers of exchange, where proficiency navigates and reinforces power: the cannibalistic system, in
which persons can be exchanged with each other, and the captaincy system, where persons are
interchangeable with nonhumans objects. The tension and partial overlap between these two registers
mirror the interplay and convergences between two mythological strata, pointing to conflicting ideas
about agency as either disseminated among group members or predominantly possessed by their
captains. This part also explores the power-infused practices of familiarization through which centers are
formed and individuals are shaped as members of specific clans and are attributed clan origins.
The second part explores how power is appropriated from the river source through processes of
familiarization of and mastery over key cultural elements—the maloca, manioc, tobacco, and coca—and
the prime notion of tne’túi to which the people at the center receive access through these elements. By
aligning the agency of these elements and the beings associated with them to their own, they draw on
these forces to prey on different beings and determine the direction of familiarization in exchanges with
them.

74

The third part, titled “Power in a Cosmos of Multiple Centers,” investigates the continuities between
power asymmetries: how those among human centers influence and are influenced by those involving
human and nonhuman centers, and how each set of asymmetries may instrumentalize the other. This is
exemplified by the Andoque’s notions of territoriality and “territorial management,” in their political
economy of knowledge, and in people’s efforts to utilize achievements in predation or familiarization of
nonhumans for aggressions or familiarization vis-à-vis other human beings, and vice versa. It
particularly emerges in ceremonial exchanges where both inter-human and human-nonhuman tensions
are dramatized and assuaged, with a contemporary inclination among Andoque captains and members
for dances that create and maintain asymmetrical affinal exchange with humans and nonhumans alike.
In the fourth part I turn to the river mouth, exploring the idioms of predation and affinity that the
Andoque employ for conceptualizing power relations with non-Indigenous agents, as well as their
efforts to act on these relations and how these relations impact the Andoque’s exchanges with nonhuman
entities. Here, previously explored elements of ontology, kinship, and space—namely, agnatic identity,
forces from the river source, and ontological manipulation, respectively—are key to the Andoque’s
successful navigation of the complex web of relationships that underpin both extractive and
preservationist economies.
The organization of the dissertation according to the Andoque’s power-laden spatial categories reflects a
prioritization of space over time, or, in other words, an encompassment of time by space. Therefore, I do
not necessarily examine different historical periods strictly in chronological order, but rather, I do so
whenever it is relevant to understanding the spatial category or spatialized dynamics under discussion.
For instance, in Part I, which focuses on the center and its associated fluvial systems, I explore the
Andoque’s demographic and cultural reconstruction following the early twentieth-century rubber
genocide up until the 1960s. This period is addressed here because it exemplifies a significant endeavor
to establish a consanguineous center primarily operating within the captaincy system. In part III,
dedicated the relationship between centers, I return to the history of kinship dynamics mainly from the
1960s onward—after the center constituted during post-genocide years disintegrated into its clan
components, or centers. Furthermore, I reserve the examination of the Andoque’s economic history to
Part IV, where I discuss their interactions with non-Indigenous agents connected to the river mouth,
agents who have pushed for and/or organized these economic activities. However, it is important to note
that the discussion of the river mouth in the final part of this dissertation does not imply that the contents

75

of the previous parts reflect some pre-contact or ahistorical reality. The Andoque’s cosmological
conceptions and cultural practices cannot be examined in isolation from the interactions with nonIndigenous agents and their Indigenous intermediaries in which the People of the Center have engaged
over the past two centuries. Therefore, I have endeavored to provide as complete a historicized picture
as possible of the various conceptions and practices that I discuss throughout the dissertation, whenever
I possessed sufficient information or a sound basis to form hypotheses.
Methodology
This dissertation is based on ethnographic fieldwork carried out between April 2018 and June 2019
within the Andoque ancestral territory, as well as interviews with Andoque migrants in Leticia in July
2019, and a field visit in the territory in July-August 2021. Additionally, between May and August 2023
I have conducted several video and in-person interviews with interlocutors in Bogotá and Leticia to
complement information. During my extended period of fieldwork, I rotated among seven Andoque
settlements, including the pluri-ethnic Araracuara, spending varying amounts of time in each settlement.
Over time, research interests, interpersonal dynamics with my hosts in each settlement, and different
circumstances in their lives, such as their travels and engagements, led me to primarily divide my time
between two settlements: Puerto Alegría, where the maloca of Fisi from the Eagle Clan is located, and
San José, the main settlement of the Sun Clan, where I stayed at the house of Tañe and Irene. This
strategic rotation enabled me to foster relationships and engage in conversations with members of all
clans. It exposed me to diverse versions of myths, ritual traditions, accounts of recent historical events,
interpretations of contemporary community politics, and even gossip, all of which are essential for
comprehending abstract notions of power and concrete power dynamics.
The emphasis on both “notions” and “dynamics” of power corresponds to this dissertation’s endeavor to
explore both Andoque discourse and practice. My overall discussion walks the fine line between
interlocutors’ discourse and insights drawn from myth narratives concerning Indigenous forms of power
and its possession, including ideal leadership and authority, on the one hand, and fieldwork observations
reflecting a historical moment marked by a near-total breakdown of Indigenous leadership and authority,
on the other. This breakdown occurs within the context of persistent asymmetries in exchange with nonIndigenous agents, including market actors and the State. Both traditional and modern Andoque
leadership (i.e., clan captains and elders and cabildo governors and members) are nowadays weak,
fragmented, and appears to fall short of the standards set by both the leaders and ordinary society

76

members. Furthermore, the knowledge required to establish and sustain power asymmetries became a
scarce symbolic resource following a genocide that eradicated many sages and oral traditions. As a
result, it is highly contested by individuals and clans today, and subject to intricate dynamics of
concealment and disclosure within the Andoque society that are symptomatic of their competitions over
power. My understanding of the intricate politics of knowledge among Andoque members, including
people’s choices regarding which kind of information they are willing to share with each other and those
they prefer to keep concealed, guided my ad hoc decisions during the drafting of this dissertation. I
considered whether, when discussing varying versions of myths, ritual traditions, or accounts of recent
events, I should disclose or anonymize the names of my source, in some cases employing pseudonyms
signaled as such with an asterisk (*). This approach aimed to strike a balance between acknowledging
my interlocutors for the invaluable knowledge they provided and avoiding any potential exacerbation of
internal disputes or competitions over knowledge.
My fieldwork consisted of participant observation, during which I joined household members in their
daily activities. These included gardening, preparing coca powder, gathering forest resources, fishing,
and, on rare occasions, hunting—an activity where my hosts shyly admitted that I was more of a
hindrance than an assistance. Additionally, I attended various events that were irregularly held,
including internal assemblies, meetings with external agencies, conventions of the regional
representative association, and activities financed by environmental organizations. At some of these
events, I served as a secretario, documenting the proceedings at the appointment of the Andoque.
Information was gathered both during these daily and irregular activities and in conversations at the
house on other occasions, particularly during the mambeadero sessions. My interlocutors frequently
expressed nostalgia for the past state of this nocturnal male social space, which they claimed was once
subject to a stricter etiquette. In the past, a hierarchy granted speech rights based on age and ritual status,
the gatherings were larger, sometimes with dozens of participants, and the frequency of elder visits were
higher. During these visits, dialogues between elders took place in specialized codes, effectively
excluding younger participants. While I would have been eager to attend and document a heavily
ritualized session, the less formal nature of today’s mambeaderos has offered some benefits for my
research. The smaller gatherings, typically no more than seven individuals, allowed for a more
comfortable atmosphere for engaging in conversation. This informality turned many mambeadero
sessions into opportunities for deliberate information sharing, either through the initiative of my
interlocutors, who introduced various myths and topics, or through my own, as I probed in-depth about
77

themes observed during daytime activities. These rather spontaneous mambeadero conversations
substituted for interviews, which were infrequent and mostly reserved for Andoque members in cities
where time was limited. Even these interviews were unstructured, resembling free-flowing
conversations where I steered the discussion towards specific questions I had prepared or themes I
intended to explore.
During my conversations with Andoque members, I collected myths from any willing narrator,
sometimes gathering various versions of the same myth. In my dissertation, I selected the most complete
version for clarity and endeavored to remain faithful to the original storyteller’s account. I incorporated
details from other interlocutors only when essential for understanding and provided they did not
contradict the chosen narrative. Additionally, I aimed to convey the Andoque’s polyphony by
acknowledging the existence of multiple versions and interpretations of each myth. On some occasions,
I included hypotheses about certain myths suggested by individuals who were not regarded—or did not
regard themselves—as authoritative, to illustrate the personal significance and varied interpretations of
these myths in people’s lives.
The centrality of mythology and its analysis in this dissertation mirrors the significance of mythical
narratives in the lives of the Andoque, particularly for their “charter” aspect, in Jacopin’s (2010)
abovementioned reformulation, as a conduit for transmitting agency and providing narrators and
listeners with “a social but non-normative vade mecum” (ibid, my translation). Drawing inspiration from
Percy Cohen’s (1969) view that different approaches to mythology complement and enhance each other,
I examine mythical narratives through structural, historical, sociological, psychological, and ritualrelated lenses. In the context of this research, I consider mythology as a medium through which the
Andoque justify, explore, and enact power relations with human and nonhuman beings.
My fieldwork was primarily conducted in the Spanish language, which is nowadays the predominant
spoken language among Andoque members. The Andoque rarely use their native language in
conversations with each other, and mastery of this language is, with a few exceptions, limited to people
over fifty years old, who often opt for using Spanish even in their interactions with each other. I mostly
encountered Andoque conversations on rare occasions when Andoque elders visited each other’s
mambeadero. Younger members have a passive understanding of the Andoque language and are familiar
with various concepts and terms in the language, ritual formulae, and names of different species, ownerpersons, and places. However, this knowledge is rarely accompanied by the ability to engage in

78

conversations in Andoque, whether on daily matters or within a mambeadero setting. Due to these
factors, I abandoned my attempts to learn Andoque as a spoken language after the initial few weeks of
fieldwork. Instead, I focused on specific inquiries into words, concepts, and ritual formulas pertinent to
my research, which remain recognized and meaningful even to those who are not fluent in Andoque.
Furthermore, I recorded, transcribed, and translated various ceremonial songs and several central myths
in the native language with the assistance of Andoque members. These practices contributed to my
understanding of this language and facilitated passive comprehension of certain conversations that I
encountered.
In my conversations with both elders and younger interlocutors in Spanish, I aimed to “control
equivocations.” This approach, as defined by Viveiros de Castro, refers to the awareness of speakers
embedded in different ontological registers that the same shared sign may actually refer to different
objects in each of these registers (2004). To achieve this, I carefully paid attention to the semantic,
pragmatic, and contextual aspects of their use of different Spanish terms. I also inquired about the
Andoque terms they would use if the conversation were conducted in that language, along with the
nuanced messages these native terms might convey.
However, it is important to acknowledge the limitations resulting from my lack of proficiency in the
Andoque language. This limitation prevented in-depth research into etymologies, morphology, and
semantics, which could have further illuminated the main concepts, notions, and mythical narratives that
I analyzed. Additionally, I could not factor in members’ use of pragmatic elements crucial to
establishing authority, such as the modalities of knowledge through which speakers indicate their
relation to the narrated information (Landaburu 2007). Nonetheless, it is worth noting that these forms
of establishing authority are scarcely used in contemporary times due to decline in native language use
and might not even be recognized as such by many Andoque members who possess limited knowledge
of the language, potentially diminishing their effectiveness.
Another limitation arises from restricting fieldwork to just one Indigenous group, which is part of a
regional network of exchanges with other Indigenous and non-Indigenous participants, while only
marginally engaging with non-Andoque individuals. This ethnic bias led to incomplete and
asymmetrical information regarding the Andoque’s matrimonial and ceremonial exchanges with their
neighbors. Complementing this information with similar accounts by these neighbors could have
provided deeper insights into the Andoque’s role in the regional power dynamics.

79

This dissertation exhibits a noticeable gender bias since the majority of my interlocutors, particularly
those who dedicated long hours to explaining cosmology, myth, and ritual, were men. I was promptly
welcomed into men’s mambeaderos, where my daily work of preparing coca powder earned me the
knowledge they generously shared. By contrast, I quickly discovered that interacting with young or
married women might lead to inconveniences with their family members, such that my substantial and
detailed conversations with female members were limited to two elders, in contrast to the broader age
range of my male interlocutors. Despite my inquiries into garden work and other female actitivies and
knowledge, the absence of full integration into these pursuits—akin to my involvement in men’s
activities—resulted in a relative dearth of information on these topics and on female concepts of power
that are undeniably associated with them. Furthermore, I learned that the practical aspects of mythical
narratives yield slightly different versions tailored for individuals of distinct genders. Consequently, I
was not exposed to the same myth versions shared with girls before marriage, pregnant women, or
young mothers. It is evident that a woman anthropologist would likely have gained access to different
information, which could complement or challenge some of my interpretations.
While I was fortunate to be surrounded by both elder and younger members who were generally willing
to share their experiences and insights, their cosmo-politics of knowledge often imposed certain
limitations on the information that they were willing to divulge. I refer here to the logic discussed in
Chapters 8 and 9, according to which the voicing of names of powerful entities, or the recitation of
mythical narratives and ceremonial songs invoking such entities, require specific ritual procedures or
even ceremonial dances; otherwise, these entities might retaliate against the speaker or their family.
References made by members to the risks involved in revealing their origin myths (as explored in
Chapter 10) or to fellow members who lost spiritual and ritual capabilities after disclosing knowledge of
different myths or ritual procedures to external researchers in the past (as discussed in Chapter 13),
suggested that certain information was withheld from me to prevent similar vulnerabilities or a loss of
power. Consequently, I refrained from pressing for certain kinds of information, such as specific healing
formulae or procedures to establish contact with owner-persons. During my fieldwork, I respected these
boundaries, guided by a similar perspective to that articulated by Rubenstein, who noted that “my task as
an anthropologist was not to uncover the truths behind a secret but to understand the power of the secret”
(2004, 1058). Certainly, the process of analyzing the collected data and subsequent writing compels the
ethnographer to explore and extend the information provided by the interlocutors by formulating
hypotheses and unveiling concealed patterns of thought, action, and narrative—efforts driven by our
80

academic “will to power” along with its interconnected desire to make the world comprehensible and
thereby governable, hopefully for legitimate purposes. I hope that my resulting interpretation remained
within the boundaries set by my Andoque friends and interlocutors, and that they do not perceive this
research as undermining the very power that I sought to study.

81

82

Part I
Power at the Center

83

84

Introduction
This dissertation employs the cosmo-spatial framework of the Andoque—a people self-identifying, like
other groups of Caquetá-Putumayo sub-region, as “People of the Center”—to explore their notions and
dynamics of power. Consequently, in order to analyze the Andoque conception of power within this
framework, it is essential to unpack the concept of the “center”: dʉi. The chapters in Part I address the
question: How does the concept of “center” permeate and inform other key notions, elements, practices,
and institutions in Andoque society that are relevant to understanding Andoque notions of power?
Scholars exploring analogous concepts related to the notion of “center” among neighboring peoples
have highlighted its spatial, corporal, moral, and ontological connotations (Echeverri 2022; García 2018;
Karadimas 2005; Londoño Sulkin 2012; Lucas 2018). Similarly, the word dʉi in the Andoque language
goes beyond its spatial meaning and also signifies “true,” “real,” and “proper” (verdadero, propio).
Thus, the root dʉ appears in constructions that convey the veracity of a particular assertion (dʉiǵ,
“indeed”) or the correct timing of fruits’ maturation on a specific tree, which then qualifies it as a
“proper” tree. Like other People of the Center, the Andoque consider themselves “real humans,” because
they reside at the very “center,” a place inhabited by morally upright humans who exemplify proper
human behavior. These real humans are contrasted with animals as well as with the “People of
Animals”—the Indigenous groups living along the Mirití, Apaporis, and Vaupes Rivers (Karadimas
2005a, 71; Londoño Sulkin 2000), who engage in balanced reciprocal exchange with affinal relatives
and with animals perceived as such (Descola 1998; 2013, 345–52). As we will explore further below,
the concept of dʉi is closely associated with that of origin: the place and process through which persons
come into being and acquire their physical bodies. Things, people, animals, and plants are considered
“proper” when they inhabit their original site or territory and act in accordance with their origins, as
recorded in mythology. This relativistic and somewhat universal notion suggests that everything
possesses its own center. However, as Echeverri astutely notes regarding common perceptions
throughout the Caquetá-Putumayo sub-region, this universal characteristic of “center” is often
contradicted by another attribute, as the concept provides “an irreducible principle of ethnic identity
(‘We are the People of the Center, and only us’)” (Echeverri 1997, 201; cf. Londoño Sulkin 2012, 6).7

Contrary to other Amazonian societies such as the Araweté and the Yanomami (Kelly 2011, 169–70; Viveiros de Castro
1992, 4; idem 2001, 27), the center among the People of the Center indicates identity and essence, such that they are not
societies “without an interior” (Viveiros de Castro 1992, 4). Inasmuch as the identity of the “center” heavily draws on the
alterity of the “river source,” as we will shortly see, this alterity is domesticated and encompassed by a notion of essence.

7

85

For the Andoque, the concept of dʉi carries a deictic value. While each one has their own center, there is
only one “true” center for any given person—the place where they are located, from which they speak,
and ideally, the place from which they originated. Dʉi thus functions as a perspectival deixis (Viveiros
de Castro 1998) that indicates the spatially-conditioned human nature of the speaker and inevitably
measures the proximity or distance of other beings from this human nature.
As is evident from the emphasis placed on the god Egret of the Center (Dʉiyo’fí), the archetype of
chiefly authority, within Andoque mythical narratives (Landaburu 1993; Landaburu and Pineda 1984;
Pineda Camacho 1975), it is clear that Andoque members themselves highlight the political connotations
associated with the concept of the center more explicitly than their neighboring peoples. This finding
aligns with research conducted on other Amazonian societies, which also identify the center as the seat
of power and authority (Goldman 2004, 348–55; Heckenberger 2005). Within various contexts, the
Andoque convey the idea that what is considered “proper” (dʉi) to one holds the potential to both
empower and jeopardize them. For instance, tutelary ceremonial dances provide protection to those who
receive a name within them and those who organize them in an appropriate manner. These dances
bestow individuals with the power to interact with both the human and nonhuman realms, making these
dances inherently “proper” to these individuals. However, inadequate performance of a “proper” dance
places the organizer at significant risk precisely because the dance is intimately connected to their
personal development and power. Furthermore, certain dances are regarded as more “proper” to specific
individuals because their origin sites are closer to the origin sites of these individuals’ clans.
This leads us to delve into the spatial dimensions of dʉi and to an interconnected question: What
characterizes the nature of the space of which dʉi is the center? At its core, dʉi can be translated as
“middle.” For instance, dʉipoo refers to midnight, while dʉinńkńn denotes midday. The term, along with
its equivalents in other languages spoken by the People of the Center, carries a dual spatial meaning. On
one hand, it signifies the inland or terra firme region situated away from the main rivers and floodplains,
and, on the other, it denotes any middle point along the river, not at the extremes (Echeverri 1997, 22;
Lucas 2018, 193). While the first meaning of dʉi is defined by environmental criteria that are relatively
rigid, the second meaning functions as a spatial deixis through which the speaker refers to their position
along the river axis, locating other people and places either upstream or downstream from their own
position (Landaburu 1985, 35–36). The entire Andoque linguistic system revolves around the fluvial
axis, which also corresponds to altitude and to the sun’s movement from east to west. The verbal prefix

86

yi- indicates actions directed towards the river source, which is higher than the speaker and towards the
west. Conversely, the prefix si- signals actions directed towards the river mouth, which is lower than the
speaker and towards the east (ibid). The two other cardinal points along this fluvial axis are obai (river
source) and oká (river mouth). These points also serve as spatial deixes. Rather than indicating specific
locations places where the river starts or ends, obai can refer to anything or anyone situated upstream
and higher from the speaker, towards the west, while okɒ́ can point to anything or anyone located
downstream and lower from the speaker, towards the east (ibid, 35–36). For the Andoque people, who
reside in the Middle Caquetá, Egret of the River Source (Obaiyo’fí) symbolizes leadership from upriver,
the Indigenous peoples living there and as far as the Andes, and Colombians in general. Egret of the
River Mouth (Okɒ́yo’fí), on the other hand, represents leadership from downriver, the Indigenous
peoples living there, Brazil and the Brazilians, the Amazon, the ocean towards which it flows, and
Whites in general, who arrived from that direction. Presently, the Andoque primarily refer to the second
spatial meaning of “center.” As a result, this dissertation’s analysis of the Andoque notion of center is
firmly grounded in the fluvial axis on which this center is positioned.
However, in this second meaning as a middle point along a river, dʉi is also a multivalent concept. In his
exploration of historical dynamics among the People of the Center, Echeverri pointed out “the
permutations in the center.” These are the diverse values, including mythical figures and ritual and work
instruments, that these peoples have associated with the concept of “center” over the course of their
recent history, spanning at least 150 years (Echeverri 2022, 112–13). Echeverri argues that these
permutations revolve around the distinction between an exogamic process and open system on the one
hand, and an endogamic process and closed system on the other (ibid). However, I find the distinction
between exogamy and endogamy to be an inadequate framework for comprehending the “permutations
of the center” among the Andoque, and I will limit my explanation to three points. Firstly, exogamic
dimensions, such as inter-clan (and, to a lesser extent, inter-ethnic) matrimonial alliances, are integral to
the pre-genocide system that Echeverri characterizes as endogamic. Conversely, the period following
recuperation has witnessed a pronounced tendency toward ethnic endogamy (see Chapter 4). Secondly,
Echeverri categorizes the two Andoque terms for Whites, “Burners” (duiɵ́hɵ) and “Traders” (dohaɵ́hɵ),
into the respective processes. He associates “Burners” with the endogamic process and “Traders” with
the exogamic one. However, it is noteworthy that both terms appear in the same Andoque myth (see
below, M5), challenging this strict categorization. Thirdly, the stone axe, positioned by Echeverri within

87

the endogamic process, is, to my knowledge, entirely absent from the ancient Andoque mythological
stratum.
However, the notion of “permutations of the center” is useful for exploring the multivalence of the
concept of “center.” As Echeverri notes based on Landaburu (1993), Egret of the Center is associated
with one meaning of “center,” while the eagle god Nénéfi (or Ñé’ñéfi) is linked to an arguably more
ancient one. Indeed, the Andoque recognize two layers in their mythology. The first comprises “Human
Beings’ Stories” (historias de gente), also referred to by maloqueros as “Captaincy Stories” (historias de
capitanía). These stories primarily focus on the mutual visits and occasional conflicts involving three
egret characters. Contemporary Andoque elders often credit these stories for their wisdom. The second
layer consists of “Animal Stories” (historias/cuentos de animales), typically associated with sorcerers
and tricksters. In these tales, various animal heroes engage with each other, often deceitfully,
lasciviously, or aggressively. Landaburu (1993) suggests that the egret mythology represents a more
recent, horizontalized adaptation of the older animal mythology. He interprets the parallelism between
the three egret heroes—whom he believes symbolize entire collectives—and their relatively peaceful
interactions as a departure from the vertical predatory dynamics that define that ancient mythic layer.
As presented by Landaburu, the distinction between the two kinds of myths roughly corresponds to the
opposition among other People of the Center, between the “Basket of Life,” which contains peaceful
discourse and myths and wisdom words propelling human sociality and regional conviviality suited for
the post-genocide “Time of Abundance,” and the “Basket of Darkness” which contains cannibal and
bellicose discourse that was common before the rubber genocide, during the “Time of Animals”
(Echeverri 2010; Lucas 2019, 115–40). As Echeverri and Lucas observe for the Murui-Muina,
Féénemɨna and Bora, people are reluctant to delve into the Basket of Darkness and relegate the
knowledge it contains to private mambeadero sessions. In contrast to their neighbors, the Andoque do
not utilize “basket” as a metaphor for knowledge, and the two kinds of stories do not imply mutual
exclusivity as the basket metaphor would suggest. During my fieldwork I observed how individuals
vacillate between these two mythical registers, as Animal Stories or elements found in them kept
appearing in mambeadero sessions, casual conversations, dream interpretations, and evaluations of
social, political, and economic actions in which people engage.
Therefore, I argue that the two mythical strata encode two distinct cosmological and political economic
fluvial systems of exchange, in each of which the concept of “center,” in its meaning as the midpoint

88

along a river, carries a different value. To characterize these systems, I borrow the terms
“heterosubstitution” and “homosubstitution,” originally employed to denote the possibility, in a given
society, of substituting nonhuman entities for humans, or the impossibility thereof, with the
corresponding limitation that one human can only be substituted by another human (Descola 2001;
Godelier 1982). According to Descola, homosubstitution is typical of native Amazonia, while
heterosubstitution characterizes Melanesian societies, where humans can be exchanged for non-human
entities. This distinction is evident in practices such as bride wealth and homicide compensation, which
involve the exchange of pigs and other objects and are prevalent in Melanesia but are mostly absent
from Lowland South America, except among the Wayuu and Mapuche. In these latter societies, cattle,
acquired through contact with the Spanish, replace humans in similar contexts (Descola 2001, 110–13).
My use of these two terms aligns with that of Stephen Hugh-Jones (2013, 368), who refers to
heterosubstitution as the exchange of elements of different kinds and homosubstitution as the exchange
of elements of the same kind. This underscores heterosubstitutive practices in Amazonia as well, such as
the exchange of items and substances that embody aspects of their givers and producers, acting as their
extensions and substitutes, and the occasional exchange of valuables for women (ibid, 370–71).
Accordingly, I view the exchange system encoded in Animal Stories as the homosubstitutive system,
and the system encoded in the egret mythology as the heterosubstitutive system. Based on the
Andoque’s perceived contrast between cannibalism and captaincy, which will be explored below, I refer
to these systems as the cannibalistic and captaincy systems, respectively.
In the homosubstitutive-cannibalistic system, persons—of both the human and nonhuman kinds—are
exchanged and consumed in order to generate other persons. The fluvial axis of this system heavily
relies on vertical metaphors. The headwaters, seen as closer to the sky and the stars, is considered to be
populated by predatory beings like jaguars and eagles. In contrast, the river mouth is associated with the
ground and underground levels, and inhabited by forest game animals, aquatic beings, and the deceased
in the underworld. On the other hand, the heterosubstitutive-captaincy system is defined through the
interchangeability of persons for other items. This system reproduces the well-attested regional
association between the river mouth and Whites and Indigenous people serving as brokers in trade with
them (Echeverri and Pereira 2005; Lucas 2018, 27–30), and involves the notion of exchangeability
between individuals and metal axes (Echeverri 2022, 100–101). It is noteworthy that, as with the Wayuu
and Mapuche cases, this convertibility strongly applies to objects obtained through contact or exchange
with non-Indigenous agents, suggesting that the drive to generalize the heterosubstitutive principle into a
89

spatial system originated from interactions with them. However, the substitution of vegetal offerings for
game animals is equally rooted in the captaincy system and relates to the broader association between
the river source, the patriline, ancestral knowledge, and horticulture, which is sparsely documented or
not documented at all among neighboring groups. Contrary to Descola’s assertion that Amazonians do
not explicitly draw homologies between body parts or physiological substances, on the one hand, and
artifacts and natural kinds, on the other (2001, 112), the exchangeability within this system is expressed
through the equation made by neighboring peoples and the Andoque, as we will explore, between a
human being and an axe, and in myths in which humans originated from cultivars.
In this first part of the dissertation, I aim to highlight both the tension and partial overlap between these
two systems while exploring the different meanings that the concept of dʉi acquires within each system.
Additionally, I will demonstrate that, similar to other Amazonian notions of meta-affinity, the Others
within each system, particularly those associated with the extreme points of the fluvial axis (i.e., river
source and river mouth), are considered potential affines. By contrast, the center is formed through
power-laden practices of familiarization, which ideally establish a sense of conviviality and
harmlessness among members of a particular group. These practices encompass name giving, nurturing,
the shaping of bodies, and work efforts aimed at producing abundant food. By examining the various
notions, elements, practices, and institutions associated with the concept of “center” in each system—
ranging from body, clan, and name to language and axes—this first part provides an initial topology of
the notion of power within the Andoque cosmos and society. The insights gained here will serve as a
foundation for further discussions in subsequent chapters.
In the first two chapters, I examine the two fluvial systems and the meaning that dʉi acquires from the
relations it maintains with the river source and river mouth within each system. I show that in each, the
center is associated with two distinct aspects: the ability to halt exchange and to participate in it as a
subject rather than object. I suggest viewing these aspects as the preconditions for the employment of
power as defined in this dissertation, i.e., engaging in beneficial asymmetric exchange. In Chapter 3, I
explore the interrelated notions of formation, origin, and clan. I discuss how persons are shaped and
integrated into these centers and how these centers sustain themselves, primarily through the practice of
name giving, which assigns newborns to a specific clan origin. Lastly, Chapter 4 investigates a crucial
process of center formation in Andoque recent history: their recovery from the rubber genocide that
occurred during the first three decades of the twentieth century.

90

Chapter 1. The Egret Universe and Its Center
Egret of the Center
Egret of the Center plays a significant role in the egret mythology and is highly esteemed in
contemporary Andoque discourse. It is believed that Egret of the Center resides in Mnfɵsíkn (Site of
Tears/Site of Rage), a rock formation located at the headwaters of several rivers within the Andoque
territory. This figure is seen as the embodiment of the center and the people living there and is often
likened to Jesus or a manifestation of Jesus specific to that region, serving as a mediator between human
beings and the Creator. While yo’fí, in its plain sense, refers to the great white egret (Ardea alba), Fisi
Andoque, the cacique and highest traditional authority, interprets Duiyo’fí as “Mature Mouth of the
Center.” This is a mouth that produces words that are as mature as a fully developed organism or an
accomplished person. While this etymology is grammatically possible, it remains uncertain (Jon
Landaburu, pers. comm., November 2022). Nonetheless, it provides insights into Fisi’s understanding of
the attributes associated with this deity, which he considers as a role model for the captaincy position.
The word dʉi not only associates this mature mouth with the center but also describes it as a “true”
mature mouth. Fisi further explains that the extended version of the name, which is Duiyo’hafisé,
translates as “the Center’s/True Mature Advice.” In the mythical register, yo’fí signifies captain. In the
contemporary local interpretation, this word conveys the notion that a captain’s words hold immense
weight, to the extent that physical force is unnecessary, resonating with common Amazonian
manifestations of political power as persuasive, rather than coercive (e.g., Clastres 1989), and, more
specifically, with the “arbitrational function” of leadership, which fosters conviviality among group
members (Kracke 1978, 84). The plans and desires of a captain manifest through his people’s actions,
influencing human and nonhuman interlocutors without resorting to violence.8 This expressive virtue is
connected to the term used in everyday contexts to refer to flesh-and-blood captains, or maloqueros:
po’soo. This term translates to “the famous” or “the resounding,” alluding to the sounds of grinding coca
in the maloca’s mortar, of playing the manguaré (ku’dɨ; a pair of monoxyl drums) for ritual and general
communication purposes and playing the multiplying beam (tu’sí) in the eponymous dance.

8

This ideal of peaceful leadership which is connected to the egret also exists among the Bora, see Lucas 2019, 339.

91

Figures 2–4. From top left to bottom: the manguaré monoxyl drums at Fisi’s maloca (photo taken by the author); Fisi
Andoque Andoque (Photo taken by the author); and men stomping on the multiplying beam at Tañe’s maloca (photo taken
from a video recorded by Levy Andoke Andoke)

No doubt, the egret’s long beak (fí, like mouth) is one of the reasons for which it assumes this role of a
“mature worded leader.” It also assumes this role for its ambulatory nature, as it is often spotted along
the banks of the main rivers on its way up or downriver, an ethological trait that leads the Andoque, like
the Bora, to evoke the egret in myths about war and exchange with other agents along these rivers
(Guyot 1972, 164).
The story “the Coca of the Animals” (M1, see Appendix 1), teaches us about the qualities that egret
figures should ideally possess, such as intelligence, diligence, decorum, self-restraint, and agility. In this
story, Egret (Yo’fí) embodies these virtues during his mission for proper coca powder preparation and
consumption, unlike the other animal figures who fail to perform the different tasks of the process and

92

receive undesirable bodily forms upon consuming this substance. Egret perceives things as they truly are
and is not deceived by the illusions that abound in the forest, where the daughter of Shadow Egg
(Ká’hoihádi) sends her men to gather yarumo leaves for ashes to mix with coca powder. If mischievous
animal figures had not intervened, Egret’s success in coca preparation would have resulted in the
voluntary surrender of coca to humanity by its original mistress, so that men today would be able to
benefit from the plant without the many restrictions accompanying it.
Egret of the Center is the “true” egret-leader (dʉi) among other such figures. Captains attribute their
power to this figure, with whom they communicate in order to gather and lead people and manage the
territory in a manner that enables prosperity, reproduction, and protection from diseases and other
harms. The power of Egret of the Center, in turn, hinges on the proper utilization of coca. In certain
instances, as depicted in the myth “Coca of the Orphans” as relayed to Landaburu and Pineda by Yiñékɒ
(“Feverish Fluff”)(M2, see Appendix 1)—the Andoque captain after the genocide and during their
research, from the Eagle Clan—the coca plant is depicted as the posthumously-transformed Egret of the
Center. In this myth, the two orphaned sons of Egret of the Center identify the coca plant as their father
transformed and reconnect with his wisdom and instructions upon preparing and consuming the coca
powder. They then interpret a thunder as a warning given by their father, to whom they refer as
Carnivorous Thunder (Sḭ́ di Dú’di), of an imminent flood from the east.
I have been told this story several times in different versions. In one version, Egret of the Center is not
portrayed as the father but as the younger brother who acknowledges that the coca is the transformed
father. In another version, which was told by members of the Sun Clan, the father is Egret of the River
Source, and his son is Egret of the Center, who was born on the Andoque territory. Seated at this upriver
maloca, Egret of the River Source saw in his vision how his son was sitting by himself at his maloca
without coca, “like a woman.” He then ordered his wife, Egret of the Center’s mother, to give their son
coca, a plant that would endow the latter with appropriate thinking and help him create human beings—
namely, the Andoque themselves. The mother gave him the plant, which was, in fact, the father, with
instructions on how to use it. After consuming the coca, Egret of the Center learned through dreams how
to create the Andoque people. When he woke up, he gave names to fruits and cultivars that exist today,
the ones for human consumption, because hitherto there were only wild fruits, which belonged to the
animals. He asked his mother to prepare manicuera drink, and the mother herself turned into the manioc

93

species for manicuera. Then, he created the Andoque people. He is the one who controls their territory,
and he still lives there.
Egret of the River Source
In another myth (M3, see Appendix 1), the origin of coca and all other garden cultivars is credited to
Egret of the River Source. Wishing to live with the Shadow Egg’s daughter, he overcomes the father-inlaw’s ruses through self-restraint, constructs a maloca, and clears a forest plot for a garden. He then
returns to the river source, and the thunder he emits signals to Shadow Egg to burn the cleared plot. In
response, his mother, the Lady Beetle of Life (Pḭɵfikn), scatters all the garden cultivars from the sky,
and serves caguana and manicuera beverages to her daughter-in-law, enabling her to give birth to a boy
and then a girl. When the wife peels the manioc, the tuber sounds “po!”, foretelling that her son will
become a captain. Egret of the River Source shares tobacco and coca with Shadow Egg and his men and
initiates a dance. After the first song, while sitting on his seat (kupa) at the mambeadero, his name
changes from Egret of the Source to Egret of the Center. He then says:9 “I am Egret of the Center. We
are going to consume coca, we are going to lick tobacco. Yes. This is my name. I am from the Center of
the Earth […].”
Similar to this first maloquero and garden owner, upon whose design the first man and woman were
created through the mediation of manioc, a captain ideally transforms his men into real human beings,
hɵ́ihɵ́, by planting and raising them (yi…pií) like cultivars (koisé) in the garden (e.g., Landaburu and
Pineda 1984, 234). As I show in Part II, the maloca that Egret of the River Source created and the
cultivars associated with him are fundamental to the processes of thinking, relating to others, acting on
various entities in one’s environment, and managing the territory, thereby playing a crucial role in
acquiring and exercising power at the Center.
In a heterosubstitutive logic, the cultural elements that Egret of the River Source brings replace him.
After erecting the maloca, he returns upriver instead of consummating his matrimony to Shadow Egg’s
daughter. Rather than fertilizing his wife through his own bodily fluids, he accomplishes it through the
rain resulting from the deliberate burning of the garden, which he instructed his father-in-law to
perform. This rain then showers down his mother’s cultivars upon the land at the center (analogous to
his wife’s body). Instead of a direct sexual activity, which is associated with predation, Egret of the

9

The following citation is taken from Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 174.

94

River Source opts for the practice of the gift—the rain and cultivars, which serve as metonyms for him.
On the other hand, the caguana and manicuera beverages, prepared by his mother, operate in the
opposite direction as nonhuman elements that catalyze the creation of human children. We may thus see
this story as setting the exchange rate between persons and cultivars and the power to exchange one for
the other.
Another elder who recounted me this story told me that it was Egret of the Center, not Egret of the River
Source, who created the pui roof, while others confuse on different occasions these two egret-figures.
The relationship between them, whether it is either affiliation or transformation, points to a certain
consubstantiality. Although the notion of transformation might imply a diachronic shift between them,
where Egret of the River Source ceases to exist upon assuming the name Egret of the Center, people
emphasize that Egret of the River Source remains in his original dwelling place on Hummingbird Hill
(Pá̰di Tuɒ́i), a hill of the canyon of Angusturas on the Caquetá River, upriver from Araracuara.
Nonetheless, Egret of the River Source maintains a certain alterity in relation to Egret of the Center, an
alterity which is considered constitutive of the Center and its powers.
We may interpret Egret of the River Source as an embodiment of the “stranger-king” figure: an outsider
to his subjects who possesses superior power and ultimately civilizes them (Graeber and Sahlins 2017,
5–7). However, in the Andoque case, the Amazonian tendency to appropriate alterity is evident,
resulting in a more dialectical process of assimilation. From the perspective of the center, Egret of the
River Source, who is an affine from upriver, becomes familiarized through the mythical narrative, in the
end of which he is called Egret of the Center. Within the narrative, it can be seen as an act of selfaffinization, as he assumes this name, containing the location of his wife’s family, once he relocates
there. Egret of the River Source thus becomes an ancestor for the people living at the center, and that
fluvial deixis is associated with ancestry and origin. According to Pineda (1979, 45 n.4), the association
with the long-beaked hummingbird (pá̰di) and Hummingbird Hill also carries ancestral connotations, as
the word is composed of “semen” (pá̰) and “penis” (di).10 Egret of the River Source represents the proto10

We find echoes of a Murui-Muina association of patrilineal ancestry and the upstream direction, contrasting with the
feminine affinal world and its association with downstream, in García’s discussion of the division among this people. The
Murui, who live upstream in masculine malocas of five pillars, claim a direct link to the Creator Father Juziñamui. On the
other hand, the Muina, who live downstream in feminine malocas of four pillars, claim communication with Juziñamui’s son,
Buinaima (García 2018, 159). This Andoque and Murui-Muina association of ancestry with the river source contrasts with
the ancestral anaconda’s ascent upstream from the river mouth in Tukanoan and Arawakan origin myths. In those myths, the
anaconda drops sib ancestors along the rivers, and the settlement pattern follows with elder sibs living downriver from

95

Egret of the Center—proto-leadership, proto-self-restraint, proto-intelligence, and proto-diligence—but
he only becomes real, dʉi, once he is seated on his seat, in his mambeadero, at his maloca: at the very
deictic center from an Andoque narrator’s point of view. His familiarization represents the full
incorporation by the Andoque of the elements he brought, and their control over the reproduction of
these elements. In Dumont’s (2013) terms, it is an action of hierarchical encompassment, where the term
“center” contains the key components of “river source.”
However, the version of the myth recorded by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 165–76) presents an
additional perspective on the direction of familiarization. In this version, the narrator Yiñékɒ emphasizes
the moments when Egret of the River Source provided Shadow Egg with coca and tobacco, especially
before the celebration of the dance where he would assume his new name (ibid, 172–73). Anticipating
our later discussions in Part II regarding how the provision of these substances to others instills in them
benevolent dispositions toward the donor, we can assert that Egret of the River Source familiarizes
Shadow Egg and his household members by providing them coca and tobacco. In this way he manages
to become their leader and teacher and engage them as his workers in his designs. This is evident, for
example, in his provision of food for the house posts, identified as his wife’s relatives (ibid, 175). Thus,
we witness here dialectics of familiarization: the river source is familiarized by the center as part of the
same process through which the center is familiarized by the river source. Nevertheless, Egret of the
River Source’s assumption of the name “Egret of the Center” is critical, indicating that difference is put
to the service of identity, and not vice versa, contrary to Viveiros de Castro’s observations for the
Araweté and other Amazonian societies (1992, 4; 2001, 27).
Egret of the River Mouth
Such familiarization does not occur in relation to Egret of the River Mouth. In various myths, the river
mouth is portrayed as extremely hostile, and the corresponding egret represents perverse leadership and
worthless advice. In a key myth called “The War of the Speaking Tree,” whose contours I summarize
here (M4; Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 56–57), this war begins after Egret of the River Mouth visits
younger sibs (S. Hugh-Jones 1993, 238–39; C. Hugh-Jones 1979, 239; Goldman 2004, 90). Interestingly, according to
Elizabeth Reichel, the settlement pattern of the Arawak-speaking Yucuna, who are the people of the Vaupés-Apaporis area
living the closest to the People of the Center, aligns more closely with the latter’s association between ancestry and river
source, as elder sibs live upriver from younger sibs (Reichel 1989, 78–79; but see van de Hammen 1992, 30, 128). The
Tukanoan association of ancestry with downriver nevertheless does not preclude its association with the thunder and its
abode in the sky (S. Hugh-Jones 1993, 105)—which, for the Andoque, are continuous with the river mouth.

96

Egret of the Center. While returning home after being well received by his host, Egret of the River
Mouth crosses a log bridge over a stream where his host’s wife is bathing. Filled with desire, he cannot
help but gaze at her, leading him to fall off the bridge and nearly die. Egret of the Center saves him, but
Egret of the River Mouth cannot forgive the humiliation and sends the ruthless Speaking Tree
(Hɵɵ́idɨtákń) to disrupt life at the center. As Fisi told me, Egret of the River Mouth allowed himself to
be disturbed by the wife of his host at an earlier stage during his visit, as he sat facing his host and stared
at the female area of the maloca’s rear. Fisi concluded that visitors to a maloca should sit next to their
host, aligning their perspectives to look outward.
However, Egret of the River Mouth is not entirely negative, and the goods he possesses are desperately
needed. This is illustrated in M5, which narrates the origin of trade with Whites (see Appendix 1). The
myth recounts how the daughter of Egret of the Center engenders the dog, metal axe and other tools,
which are then appropriated by Trader Egret of the River Mouth (Okɒ́yo’fí Dohaɵ́hɵ), who also abducts
the woman, leaving the violent Burner Egret of the River Source (Obaiyo’fí Duiɵ́hɵ) both spouseless
and toolless. In response, her brother travels to the river mouth to negotiate for the return of some of
these essential goods, referred to in Andoque as kahɵ́ɵi, which literally means “our missing [things].”
This leads to a series of visits and exchanges, during which foodstuffs and beverages unique to each
party are traded as offerings (ɵtasé) and payments (ɵpáha), with Egret of the Center’s word “moving
forward” (yahuha hɵɵ́i) as he provides more foodstuffs than he receives. Finally, the two parties trade
work-essential goods for the rubber latex demanded by Egret of the River Mouth.
This story represents the Andoque’s understanding of their interactions with non-Indigenous people in
general and the dynamics of the rubber period in particular. It associates the river mouth with
manufactured goods, especially metal tools, acquired through direct or indirect exchange with nonIndigenous people. The myth follows a clear heterosubstitutive logic, evident from the beginning with
the engendering of nonhuman objects by a woman. This woman is eventually taken by a husbandcaptor. As will be discussed in Chapter 9, bride taking often establishes de facto matrimonial exchange,
as the asymmetrical transference of women requires a counter-transfer in the opposite direction, based
on the homosubstitutive principle that human life is compensated by another human life. However, when
the woman’s brother visits his brother-in-law, he does not seek marriageable women among his affinal
relatives. Instead, he requests some of the objects engendered by his sister, which can be seen as his
nephews, and, more precisely, marriageable nieces. These objects would contribute to the social

97

reproduction of his group in a similar way to how his sister contributed to the reproduction of her
husband’s group. In other words, humans (represented by the sister) are portrayed here as
interchangeable with merchandise, which itself it interchangeable with ritual substances, rubber, and
manioc sap, all of which can replace each other.11
In contrast with Egret of the River Source in M3, the affinal Egret of the River Mouth is never fully
familiarized and encompassed by the center. Instead, it is the metal axe and other merchandise, begotten
by a woman from the center, that become affinized. As a result, the people at the center lose control over
the reproduction of these objects and remain reliant on the river mouth to acquire them.
As we learn from M6, which recounts the origin of swidden work (see Appendix 1) and relayed to
Landaburu and Pineda by Yinñéfɵkn (“Striped Feather”), an Andoque man from the Eagle Clan who
had survived the genocide and was the eldest member of the community during their research, work
itself is associated with the river mouth. In this story, Egret of the River Mouth, also known as Axe
Egret (Pɵɵyo’fí) and Work Egret (Báőiyo’fí), wields his metal axe to fell trees in Sun’s (Ḭɒ̰) garden in
order to unite with the latter’s daughter. He evades predation by his father-in-law and manages to safely
cut down the most dangerous tree through the combination of a ruse and collaboration with various
figures. Upon narrating this myth, my interlocutors referred to the tree that Sun asked his daughter’s
suitors to fell as “Stone Tree” (fisidɨtákń), explaining that its fruits killed the suitors because they
transformed into stones when hitting them.
Through the metal axe, Axe Egret/Egret of the River Mouth embodies a significant aspect of leadership:
the capacity to coordinate work projects (particularly in clearing gardens), organize workers, as
demonstrated by Axe Egret’s management of animals in the story, and protect them during work, as
exemplified by his ability to safeguard himself from Sun’s harm.12 Thus, while the “mature mouth”
translation of yo’fí refers to the arbitrational function of leadership, or the rex leader type, in Kracke’s
(1978, 84) terminology, Axe Egret exemplifies the commotive function, or the dux leader type. Prior to
organizing collective work (fokaa), a captain shares the tale of Axe Egret to safeguard his workers from
potential mishaps, such as tree collapses, snake bites, and conflicts among workers. The captain’s
reputation and leadership heavily rely on motivating people for work (horticultural or otherwise) to
The notion that non-Indigenous goods represent one’s sister’s descendants, or others connected through female kin, may
reflect historical practices where captains preferred to trade individuals, including distant kin, outside their clan—those not
linked by patrilineal descent. For a similar notion among the Miraña, see Karadimas 2001, 93.
12
See also Pineda Camacho 1975.
11

98

ensure abundance. This abundance, in turn, enables demographic growth and hospitality, which
enhances the captain and his people’s influence. It also facilitates the distribution of foodstuffs and other
substances to human and nonhuman beings, aiming to prevent conflicts and foster conviviality in diverse
contexts.
The goods and substances from the river source and the river mouth serve to both complement and
counter each other. While the work instruments obtained from the river mouth are essential for clearing
gardens and planting the cultivars appropriated from the river source, the substances derived from these
cultivars serve to counter negative elements originating from the river mouth, providing the center with
an advantageous position in exchanges with people from that direction.13 We will revisit this theme in
Part IV. For now, we turn to the significance of “center” within the context of this captaincy river
system.
On Axes, Captains, and Orphans
In a perspectival manner, we may say that, seen from the river source, the people at the center are
cultivars; seen from the river mouth, they are goods. However, the center in the heterosubstitutivecaptaincy system also embodies two qualities that reflect the preconditions for exercising power, as
defined in this dissertation: first, the capacity to refuse or suspend exchange, and second, the status of
being the exchanging agent, rather than the exchanged object. These are essential for affecting beneficial
asymmetrical exchange of different elements.
The suspension of exchange is symbolized by the autochthonous stone axe. According to M5 on the
origin of trade, the axes that were not taken by Egret of the River Mouth remained under Axe Hill. The
Andoque discovered deposits of stone axes in this and other sites of their territory, likely left behind by a
previous civilization. These axes were utilized for horticultural purposes prior to the introduction of the
metal axe. In mythology, those who discovered the stone axes are known as the “Piercers” (Yɒ’nnkń),14
proto-human heroes who navigated the Caquetá River and its tributaries, providing names to these
waterways, creating human language (albeit with mispronunciation from the perspective of
contemporary Andoque speakers, see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 224–25, n.19), and healing the

It is worth noting that in the origin myths that focus on tobacco, this plant is associated with fish, and consequently, with
the river mouth. However, in M3, tobacco is attributed an origin from upriver, along with the other cultivars.
14
The literal meaning of the name is “the time of piercing.” in Spanish they are often referred to as los Gigantes (“the
Giants”), although the stories about them mention their ability to go through rocks and trees, not their extraordinary size.
13

99

territory by vanquishing malevolent creatures and transforming the people of their time into animals.15
The Piercers also commemorated their feats in the petroglyphs they left along the Caquetá and some of
its tributaries.

Figure 5. A Murui-Muina Stone Axe. Source: Musée du quai Branly, Inventory no. 71.1975.26.60.

In a region where lithic materials are scarce, the significance of this resource cannot be overstated. The
axe plays a crucial role in horticultural work, which is central to maintaining a human identity. As
Griffiths (2001) argued in relation to the Nɨpóde, engaging in diligent labor and adhering to gardening
practices, as well as proper consumption of cultivars, serves as an ongoing affirmation of human identity
within a dualistic cosmology. According to this cosmology, human beings were bestowed with the
knowledge and tools necessary for swidden agriculture and the cultivation of “true” crops, while
malevolent beings were relegated to the bodily forms of game animals (ibid, 251–55).
As a potent instrument, the axe gave rise to the use of more abstract expressions of power in the
Andoque language, embodying the ability to act and to form and transform things and people. “I am
afraid of your axe” (hapɵɵ oyíta̋i), says the man who clears a new garden plot in the forest and
acknowledges the owner-person of that location, before demanding that that spirit show him the same
fear-respect in return, due to his own “axe,” or power (opɵɵ hayíta̋i, “you are afraid of my axe”). The
stone axes are also connected to humans as social beings participating in communal projects. As Pineda
cogently suggested, the limited effectiveness of stone axes necessitated large-scale communal efforts to
clear garden plots, whereas with the introduction of metal axes, clearing could be done by members of

Whiffen: “The Indian cannot say from whence they [the stone axes] came, there is no memory of their makers; they are, in
fact, looked upon as veritable gifts from the gods” (1915, 94). For the story concerning the discovery of the stone axes, see
Pineda Camacho 1975, 474–75. For other achievements by the Piercers, see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 204–10.
15

100

only one clan or even nuclear family (Pineda Camacho 1975, 457). However, at the group level, the
stone axe symbolizes economic autonomy, representing the autochthonous power to produce and sustain
social groups materially. This power translated into the ability to acquire various goods from other
Indigenous groups. Neighboring peoples attest that their ancestors obtained stone axes from the
Andoque before trade with the Whites became widespread (Guyot 1979, 103; Pineda Camacho 1975,
459). Moreover, the exonym Andoque, by which this people is known today, means “People of the Axe”
in the Murui-Muina language (Adokɨ; Thomas Griffiths, pers. comm., 2021).16 However, Landaburu
(1993, 151) seems to be correct in arguing that as a self-designation, “People of the Axe” (Pɵɵ Síɵ́hɵ),
which occupies a marginal place in mythology, became common after the rubber genocide, as part of
Yiñékɒ’s project to create a unified ethnic identity for the remaining speakers of the Andoque language
to transcend the history of conflicts among distinct clans. Tellingly, the construction of collective
identity centered around an object embodying self-sufficiency occurred during a period when the
Andoque were already integrated into global economy through rubber extraction and the consumption of
externally manufactured goods through the mediation of the rubber boss. However, in embodying selfsufficiency, the stone axe symbolizes the power to withdraw from potentially adverse exchange.
The axe is metonymic for people who engage in work using axes. “Lending someone an axe” signifies
joining him as collaborator in clearing a garden plot. In dreams, axes stand for people as workforce.17
However, this also includes metal axes. During the period of trade with Europeans and Brazilians from
downstream until the late nineteenth century, the metal axe, along with other items grouped under the
“axe” category, was not simply a metonymy for an Indigenous individual; it was the accepted exchange
value for them throughout the Caquetá-Putumayo region (Echeverri 2022, 100–101; Pineda Camacho
1985, 77–80). As is evident in the ancient songs from the region cited by Echeverri and Pineda and
expressing sorrow, fear, and critique of captains trading their people, a person would not want to be
traded for an axe (and the other merchandise for which it stands). This brings us to the second aspect of
the center in the heterosubstitutive-captaincy system: the vertical distinction between orphans and
captains.

Cf. Landaburu’s alternative explanation (1979, 13 n.1).
Interestingly, in Andoque mythology, the axe serves as a metonymy for the woodpecker, who was the first creature to work
with an axe; in its case, the axe was his beak (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 49, 54). On this metonymy among the Miraña, see
Karadimas 2005b, 325.
16
17

101

“Orphans” (i’hɵ́ɵá síɵ́hɵ) is one of the terms used to designate the people living and working in a
maloca who are not consanguineous kin to the captain, in addition to the more general terms “workers”
(báɵ̋i síɵ́hɵ) and “youth” (yɨḛn síɵ́hɵ). These terms express different aspects of their position in relation
to the captain: juniority, availability as a workforce, and lack of agency. The concept of “orphans” is
common among the People of the Center. Since the captain is regarded as a father to his people, an
orphan is someone who has lost their captain for various reasons and has sought protection by joining
another maloca. In Lucas’ analysis of Bora kinship system, orphans are also classificatory nephews who
marry into a maloca, thereby becoming de facto “bereft” of their original captain-fathers and headed by
captains from another clan (Lucas 2019, 203–10; 2021). Therefore, the captain-orphan relationship
reflects the transformation of asymmetrical affinity into asymmetrical consanguinity through a metaaffiliative adoption relationship, forming a type of master-pet dynamic (Costa and Fausto 2019; Fausto
2008, 333). Lucas convincingly demonstrates that orphanhood exists along a gradient, where a person’s
degree of orphanhood in relation to the captain varies, ranging from being a direct descendant of the
captain to being his son-in-law to being held as a war captive in his maloca. The level of control exerted
by the captain and the services expected from the individual increase as they become “more orphan,”
while the nurturing and protection they receive from the captain diminish (Lucas 2021, 16). According
to Lucas, orphans occupy a liminal space between humanity and animality, and joining a maloca is their
way of securing their existence as social, human beings (ibid, 14–15). As marginalized members of their
host clans, they were the ones who were traded for manufactured goods in the past, but their
incorporation into malocas after the genocide facilitated processes of recovery (Echeverri 2022, 96,
112–13; see also Chapter 4).
In Andoque, ’ihɵ́ɵ means “one for whom there is absence,” thus i’hɵ́ɵá síɵ́hɵ can be understood as
“people of absence” or “people in need.” They assume a role marked by lack and submissiveness
relative to the captain, who personifies the collective agency of his people and the nonhuman entities he
engages for their benefit (see Chapter 5). Orphanhood is an acquired condition. As Oiara Bonilla (2005)
observes for the Paumari, submissiveness towards non-Indigenous bosses can reflect agency,
particularly in neutralizing predatory dangers by eliciting the superior’s pity and care. Similarly,
Andoque orphans sought the protection of captains from various human and nonhuman dangers,
including from the captain’s own predatory potential. However, Bonilla’s claim that the Paumari’s
capacity for submission acts as a predatory weapon (ibid, 59) may be overstretched for the Andoque
orphans, whose status in the past could lead to their exchange as slaves (ḭnhḛ́sói). Orphans thus lack
102

predatory agency, and reversing this status requires reclaiming such agency. For example, in the myth of
the orphan pipe blower (M7, see Appendix 1), this character, residing in the maloca of his maternal
relatives who have killed his father, regains his agency by obtaining a phallic weapon associated with
his paternal lineage—namely, the blowpipe of his father, which his mother has hidden from him.
The captain-orphan relationship can be further understood by comparison with the relationship between
a pet, ḭéna̰, and its owner, ḭ́ ’ɵsiɵ́ɵhɵ. The pet is typically of a different species or bodily form from the
owner. While it is fed (ɵsé) by and accompanies (ɵʼɵhɵ/ḭ́ ’ɵ́ɵhɵ) the owner, the pet maintains its
alienness and agency, which the master utilizes. Yet, the relationship is asymmetrical; “companionship”
implies assistance (ḭ́ ) and the “essence” of companionship is the master (ḭ́ ’ɵsiɵ́ɵhɵ literally translates to
“help-essence-companion”), making the pet the master’s helper, not the other way around. By contrast,
an orphan has less agency and resembles a cultivar, planted and grown by the captain (yi…pǵi), who
maintains with his orphans a relationship marked by greater control, ownership, and alienability. Besides
being “accompanied” by his orphans, as their captain, a maloquero is also pa̰kói, meaning “the one who
commands,” based on the verb pa̰ that denotes both “to command” and “to send,” similar to its Spanish
translation mandar (Andoque Andoque and Landaburu, forthcoming). This may be linked to the fact
that, as discussed in Chapter 9, both orphans and cultivars may serve as rather tame objects of exchange
“sent” between transacting agents. Game animals, in their non-dangerous state for human consumption,
are depicted both as the orphans of their owner-persons—or nonhuman captains, also considered
yo’fís—and as fruits in the eyes of these masters. Orphans can be detached from their maloca and given
to others, similar to how an owner-person can allow a hunter pick some of the “fruits” in its “garden”
(i.e., the forest). This can be formulated in the following manner:
captain : orphan :: gardener : cultivar :: owner-person : game animal
A captain, as the owner of orphan-cultivars, has the ability to exploit them or delegate their exploitation
to others, as epitomized by the historical slave trade, a phenomenon that authors, both past and present,
have recognized as bolstering captains’ prestige and authority (Echeverri 1997, 97; Spix and Martius
1981, 230). This is similar to how, as we will see in Chapter 9, nonhuman owner-persons can also accept
vegetal offerings in exchange of their personnel, whose predation is delegated to the human hunter.
Although Fisi associates the word fí (“mouth”) in the concept yo’fí with a captain’s faculty of speech,
this word also reveals the captain’s capacity to devour his men or concede this predation to others.
Mythology includes cautionary tales about what people refer to as “false yo’fís,” individuals who
103

attempted to assume the role of captains but failed due to their inability to control their aggressiveness.
In one tale (M8, see Appendix1), Egret’s son dies after the father receives a jaguar as game for a dance
and cannot control the power of the feline. Enraged, Egret hangs his wife upside-down, transforming her
breast into two manguaré drums.18 In another tale (M16, see chapter 6), Egret desires the skins of the
jaguars of the stars that have descended to earth. When he wears them, he sees his people as game and
devours them.19 While they are referred to as false yo’fís, their portrayal by Fisi as predecessors to Egret
of the Center further elucidates the Egret ideal, reflecting the implicit reliance of a captain’s authority on
violence. Moreover, the contemporary ideal of peaceful leadership associated with the concept of yo’fí,
exemplified by Egret of the Center, stands in stark contrast to the historical reality among the Andoque
and other People of the Center. Before the rubber genocide, the captain’s authority was based on his
predatory potential and the display of war trophies in the form of ritually consumed enemies at his
maloca (Lucas 2021; de Wavrin 1948; Whiffen 1915). As any other Amazonian owner, the captain is a
protector of his group members who appears as a predator to outsiders (Costa 2010; Fausto 2008). In
what appears to be a Clastrian safeguard to prevent the captain’s exploitation of power coercively, the
stories of the “false yo’fis” serve as a warning to captains, urging them to resist the temptation to prey on
their own people and encouraging them to control their anger when interacting with them. Contrary to
this unjust aggression, the captain’s historical role in the slave trade reflects the delegation of predation
to outsiders for the “common good”—allowing non-traded group members to use acquired metal tools
and other merchandise for projects of prosperity and social reproduction headed by the captain.
The distinction between captain and orphan and their distinct degrees of agency reflects a tendency
towards what Kaj Århem (2015) describes as hierarchical animism, a form of animism found in
Southeast Asia. According to Århem, this type of animism posits a universalized subjectivity among
beings, similar to “standard” animism, but instead of segmenting this subjectivity horizontally across
bodies, it grades it vertically, assigning each being a different level of spirit or potency (ibid, 25). This
hierarchizing dimension is not unfamiliar in Amazonia either (Fausto 2007a, 503), and we can view the
captain-orphan relation among the Andoque as an historically-specific manifestation that tends toward
greater hierarchization.

For two such stories about the trials to which Egret of the Center is put in ceremonial dances, one of which is a variant of
the myth mentioned here, see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 117–123.
19
See also Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 123–25.
18

104

To fully comprehend and contextualize the relationship between the egret universe and the captainorphan hierarchy, it is necessary to delve into Landaburu’s (1993) exploration of the emergence and
consolidation of egret mythology. Drawing on recordings from the 1960s and 1970s of myth versions
narrated by Yiñékɒ and his son Fisi, on the one hand, and Yiñékɒ’s adversaries, particularly Yinñéfɵkn,
on the other, Landaburu highlights the contrasting perspectives presented in these narratives. Yiñékɒ’s
versions assign a crucial role to the three egret-gods who traverse the river horizontally, while
Yinñéfɵkn’s align more closely with Animal Stories, featuring heroes belonging to diverse faunal
species who navigate both the vertical and horizontal realms, even encountering celestial beings. While
Ñé’ñéfi (pronounced Nénéfi by other narrators), a cannibal god associated with the origin of the Eagle
Clan and engaged in war with heroes associated with other Andoque clans, takes center stage in
Yinñéfɵkn’s narratives, Egret of the Center assumes the main protagonist role in Yiñékɒ’s versions.
Egret of the Center partakes in war and exchange along the river with two other egret gods who, despite
occupying positions along the watercourse, belong to the same species as Egret of the Center.
Landaburu posits that Yiñékɒ homogenized the Andoque mythology by attributing different egret
identities to older heroes and restructuring the narratives along the horizontal axis of the river, which
facilitates exchange among human peers, both Indigenous and non-Indigenous. The egret figure was
chosen to convey a social character and human likeness, based on the double status of this bird as both
prey and predator, which, nonetheless, does not eat humans. This shift contrasts with the vertical axis
extending from the sky to the netherworld and involving figures positioned in predatory relationships.
According to Landaburu, this reconfiguration served as a powerful ideological tool wielded by Yiñékɒ,
aspiring to embody Egret of the Center, in his quest to forge a comprehensive Andoque identity and
foster peaceful exchanges among clans and with external agents.
However, despite Yiñékɒ’s significant role in systematizing the egret mythology and attributing new
traits and narrative functions to the egret figures, it is important to note that egret figures predated him.
As can be observed in M6, egret heroes were not unfamiliar to Yinñéfɵkn, and we also find them in
myths related to fluvial expeditions and exchange among other People of the Center (Echeverri and
Pereira 2005; Guyot 1972; Lucas 2019). It is possible that these ambulatory, fluvial birds gradually
became integrated into Andoque mythology during the nineteenth century, as mobility along the
Caquetá and Cahuinarí Rivers—where they are frequently spotted—became a growing concern due to
increased commerce with Whites. However, it is important to note that an egret figure represents a
collective of humans in a manner akin to that of their captain, who embodies them, similar to any owner
105

representing their personnel (Fausto 2008). My interlocutors emphasized that the primary designation of
this figure is captaincy; it only secondarily refers to human groups. This implies that the equivalence and
commensurateness attributed to the different egret figures in mythology conceals the hierarchical nature
of the system, as each egret-captain has orphans, cultivars, or objects at their disposal, which they can
potentially exchange with other egret-captains. The expressive capacity of a yo’fí, characterized by a
“mature mouth,” may thus point not only to the captain’s arbitrational function or predatory potential,
but also to his negotiating orphans for objects with other captains—i.e., to heterosubstitution, the
principle permeating the egret mythology. Based on this argument, I suggest that the egret universe
represents the ideology of the pre-genocide slave trade and the dimension of ongoing heterosubstitutive
trade among human and nonhuman entities, and should not be viewed as specific to the post-genocide
reconstruction.
In conclusion, the first aspect of the center in the captaincy system relates to self-sufficiency and the
suspension of exchange, symbolized by the stone axe. The second aspect concerns the distinction
between captains and orphans/cultivars, or the subjects and objects of exchange. This vertical dimension
of domination is crucial for engaging in horizontal exchanges with others, where issues of supremacy
and potential domination come into play. It is within this vertical dimension that the political and
economic act of valuation takes place, allowing the human or nonhuman captain to exert power by
assessing the relative value of his people and determining who should be exchanged for goods/vegetal
offerings.20 Thus, I posit that involvement in the slave trade, irrespective of the material benefits it
provided, enhanced the status of captains.
Shifting our focus to the cannibalistic system and the mythological underpinnings of the egret stories,
we will now examine the significance of the center in this specific context.

As Rubenstein argues for Xikrin chiefs, based on Fisher’s ethnography, chiefs controlling exchange with non-Indigenous
agents “are producers of ‘exchange-value’” (Rubenstein 2004, 157; see also Fisher 2000, 121).

20

106

Chapter 2. The Predatory Cosmos and Its Center
Elevation and Predation
Predatory capacities are central to determining the direction and asymmetrical nature of diverse
exchanges within the Andoque reality, and they are perceived as differentially distributed across space.
The cannibalistic fluvial system relies heavily on the difference in altitude between the river source and
mouth, transforming the horizontal fluvial axis into a vertical one. The river source is associated with the
forest canopy, the sky, and the stars, while the river mouth is connected to the underground. Within this
system, those located upstream and at higher elevations prey upon those located downstream and at
lower elevations. Jaguars (ḭño̰)—a category that includes the jaguar itself (Panthera onca; ḭño̰) and other
large terrestrial predators—are associated with the river source. Their captain, Sı̰ ́di, embodies the
cannibalistic and predatory principle of the cosmos and resides upstream. He is linked to masculinity
and the imposition of paternity through its association with the phallic-stinged bumblebee (Jara 1995,
156), and the thunder that echoes from upriver carries his messages (cf. M2). Eagles (kádánni), a
category that includes the harpy eagle (Harpia harpyja: ñḛmḭ kádánni) and other birds of prey, dwell in
the sky. Their captain, Nénéfi, resides in the sky above the Site of Tears at the center. Sitakara, another
aggressive god whose name combines two names of herbs used for assault sorcery (Pineda Camacho
1982, 27), resides in Spawning River (Ḭ ́’pá̰se, known also as Monochoa River), located on the border
between the Andoque and the Murui-Muina ancestral territories (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 216).
Landaburu and Pineda (ibid, 113) document a myth in which Sitakara is described as one of the stars,
which are depicted as predatory ocelots (Leopardus pardalis). I was told by Fisi that Sitakara is the
captain of certain aggressive monkeys, and, consequently, he is also associated with the forest canopy.
By contrast, those living downstream and at lower elevations are perceived as game, including animals
on the forest ground and aquatic creatures like fish. The guardians of these game creatures, such as
animals’ person-owners residing in underground malocas beneath lakes and hills, as well as caimans,
stingrays, and anacondas in the rivers, are powerful beings that prey on those who wish to harm their
“people.” The center of the river, located between the ground and the sky, is inhabited by human beings
who are both predators and prey (see also Landaburu 1985, 37).
In analyzing similar perceptions among the Miraña, Karadimas emphasizes a perspectival logic that also
exists in Andoque thinking. According to him, the cosmos is divided into two sets of dualities: looking
up from the center, a subject sees entities as predators and becomes their prey, while looking down, they

107

see entities as prey and assume a predatory position (Karadimas 2005b, 299). As in Miraña mythology
(ibid, 352), this division is reflected in Andoque myths, where a hero’s position along the river and on
the vertical axis determines how they perceive their affines: Sun, who is associated with high elevations,
is a predatory figure, while Shadow Egg, who lives under a pile of leaves on the ground, represents prey;
upriver affines are seen as jaguars, while downriver affines are seen as aquatic beings protected by
predatory owners. Shadow Egg, for instance, perceives his daughters’ suitors—the deer, tapir, and
earthworm sons of Tatoañei from the headwaters of the Macaw River (Áduse)—as jaguars. By contrast,
Sun/Capybara (Sɒ̰’ḛ ́ ),21 who lives along a tributary of Drawing River (Hḭ’ḭse), sees his affines from the
river mouth as fish headed by their caiman uncle, stingray grandmother, and anaconda grandfather
(Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 190–201).
Based on this information and Landaburu’s genealogical inquiry into Andoque mythology, we can now
reassess the character of Egret of the River Source. Similar to Egret of the Center, previously known as
Nénéfi, Egret of the River Source appears to embody a less violent version of Sı̰ ́di, Sitakara, and
Tatoañei. Like Sı̰ ́di, Egret of the River Source communicates with the people living at the center through
thunders echoing from upriver (see M3). Like Sitakara, he is associated with the origin of garden fruits
and cultivars (Pineda Camacho 1982, 27).22 Similar to Tatoañei, a predatory figure whose sons seduce
and inflict diseases on the daughters of Shadow Egg (see M20 and Chapter 9), Egret of the River source
seeks marriage with a daughter of Shadow Egg living at the center. Some narrators describe Sḭ́ di as the
father of Egret of the River Source, just as Nénéfi is depicted by members of the Eagle Clan as the father
Egret of the Center.23 These gods are considered the egrets’ fathers because they represent analogous
characters in an older mythological layer, preserving the aggressiveness and supernatural powers that
their “sons” may require under certain circumstances. As a result, these older gods are still invoked for
purposes such as healing or divination that are beyond the realm of captaincy.
The vertical character of the cannibalistic system is manifested in its purest form in the classification of
animate entities from the point of view of any given being into “People of Above” (kadaiño̰e) and
We find the conflation of these two characters in Landaburu and Pineda’s version. In one of the versions that I heard,
Capybara was described as Sun’s worker, and in all the versions he protects the Pouteria ucuqui fruit (local Spanish: yugo)
created by Sun.
22
For a similar duality of the egret god’s name among the Bora, see Guyot 1972, 164.
23
Since all the elders with whom I worked were trained by Yiñékɒ, most of the myth versions that I have collected, as
conflicting as they may be, largely reflect the traditions of the Eagle Clan. Therefore, I cannot establish whether there were
different Egret of the Center antecedents in other clans, or if Egret of the Center is an elaboration of that clan alone, with
Nénéfi as the only antecedent. The latter option would imply a deeper hegemony of the Eagle Clan’s traditions.
21

108

“People of Below” (kakńño̰e). From a human standpoint, the People of Above include celestial bodies,
predatory birds, jaguars, which encompass terrestrial animals that prey upon humans, and stars, which
are also classified as jaguars. On the other hand, the People of Below include game animals, their
owner-persons, the dead, and aquatic creatures. Some of the People of Below are invisible chthonic
entities, such as the owner-persons representing animals’ agency, knowledge, and reproductive forces,
as well as the souls of human beings who have fallen prey to animals and their owner-persons, joining
the animals’ houses of reproduction in lakes and beneath the hills.
Personhood, Agency, and Humanity
Personhood and agency, critical for evaluating power dynamics, are inextricably linked to predatory
capacities within the cannibalistic system. In the Andoque language, the term denoting “person,” ño̰,
refers to any being endowed with agency and intentionality. The jaguar epitomizes personhood and
agency, as the word ḭño̰ translates to “one who is endowed with the quality of personhood” (Jon
Landaburu, pers. comm., October 2022).24 Similarly, the eagle (kádánni: “song-dance of our above”), as
a predator singing and dancing in the sky, represents maximal agency, since singing-dancing at a
ceremonial dance is the apex of territorial management. These perspectives align with those of the
Miraña, who believe that “achieved humanity is found among the heavenly bodies: all those found
‘below’ are indistinctively ‘animals’” (Karadimas 2005b, 313). Since human beings can also be
perceived as game animals by their predators, they are not the ultimate humanity. According to the
Andoque, other beings along the predation axis would view themselves and their species as occupying
the central position of humanity. This differs from the restricted version of perspectivism that Londoño
(2005; 2017) attributes to the Féénemɨna. According to this approach, animals may perceive their cospecifics as human but their behavior towards each other can never be as moral as the behavior of real
human beings. In this Féénemɨna thinking, animals acknowledge human moral superiority and recognize
that human set the standards for morality, thus making it impossible for animals to compare to humans
in this respect (ibid). My Andoque interlocutors, on the other hand, while considering themselves real
human beings and striving for asymmetrical power relations with animals (see Part III), do not claim
that animals acknowledge human moral superiority. During a discussion on the definition of “animal”
(ḭsu) at a workshop aimed at formulating a cultural plan for territorial management in December 2018,
Elias, a maloquero of fifty-years-old, expressed the prevailing view by stating: “What seems to us like
24

Pineda interprets the jaguar as representing “the abstract Ego; the abstract masculine Desire” (1979, 46; my translation).

109

disorder is their [the animals’] order. They are criminals for us, but we also appear as criminals to
them.”
The Andoque’s inclusive view of agency and personhood, extended to nonhuman entities as well, aligns
with Descola’s (2013) definition of animism as a mode of identification perceiving similarities in
interiority among beings. Accordingly, the center along the Andoque’s cannibalistic river system is
defined not by interiority but by physicality—the criterion by which animists discern dissimilarities
among beings. This center is the speaking human body capable of suspending predation of its own kind.
Since the concept of human physicality cannot be comprehended in isolation from the process by which
animals acquired their current bodily forms, we need to briefly explore this process.
In everyday Andoque discourse, it is often mentioned that the People of Below are those who attempted
to live like human beings but, due to their immoral behavior, were punished by the Creator with animal
bodily forms and were forced into the ground. This transformation can also be seen as affecting their
houses, which became covered with mud and turned into the hills we see today. However, as I will
demonstrate shortly, this cosmogonic principle should not be taken literally in the Andoque context,
despite the perspectives of other ethnographers in the region (e.g., Londoño Sulkin 2005, 13; Griffiths
1998, 57–58). Londoño is notable for his insistence that, for the People of the Center in general, animals
are defined by their immorality, which thus gives this version of perspectivism an essentialist character
rather than a relational one (Londoño Sulkin 2005; 2012; 2017). While Londoño interprets human
predation on animals literally as hunting, he considers Féénemɨna accounts of animal predation on
humans through illnesses and madness as metaphors for asocial sentiments and behavior taking over
individuals who are depicted as ill or mad. Therefore, he places moral evaluation above relations of
predation, subjugating, in Viveiros de Castro’s (1996) terms, “the symbolic economy of alterity” to “the
moral economy of intimacy.”
My findings support the need to distinguish the Andoque from this generalization. This exception may
be attributed to the relatively limited influence of Christian morality on Andoque discourse during the
formative years following the genocide, unlike the Féénemɨna and Murui-Muina populations, where
missionization appears to have had a broader impact. Moreover, these two groups have a formalized
discursive genre, known as rafue among the Murui-Muina, which diverges from standard mythology.
Rafue encompasses abstract ideas, concentrating on the Creator and the lessons he imparted to
humanity—elements not found among the Andoque, Bora, and Miraña (Echeverri 2022, 43–45; Gasché

110

2009). This does not imply that the Andoque lack any moral discourse regarding animals or that they do
not view animals as morally flawed. However, there exists a dialectical tension between this moral
discourse and a discourse aligned with the logic of reciprocal predation, a tension that we must highlight
and explore, rather than flatten or deny. Nonetheless, as I will show in Chapter 9, my research aligns
with Els Lagrou’s (2017) suggestion, critiquing Londoño, that moral discourse largely adheres to the
logic of the relational predatory matrix, rather than the other way around. Contrary to Londoño’s
interpretation of Féénemɨna discourse, the Andoque trace the immoral sentiments and behavior
experienced by people, along with people’s cases of illness and madness, to real predatory actions on the
part of animals, rather than considering them as metaphorical in nature. They perceive these sentiments,
behavior, and illnesses as transformative forces that shape human thinking and, ultimately, transform
their bodies into those of animals. As for the Cashinahua’s perception of the Inka cannibal beings cited
by Lagrou, in Andoque thinking, animals “are not other because they are bad, but they are bad because
they are other” (ibid, 491). Among the Andoque, the sense of otherness to be cautious of extends not
only to animals but also to members of other clans.
The trope suggesting the Creator punished past human generations for transgressions of his laws and
their aggression toward each other is only superficially present in Andoque mythology. It is more
commonly the result of people’s rationalization and simplification of intricate and diverse mythical
narratives, particularly in certain contexts such as when introducing an outsider to their mythology. A
closer examination of mythology would assist in unraveling this cosmogonic principle and exploring the
intertwined processes of human and animal bodily formation.
Unlike neighboring People of the Center (e.g., García 2018; Karadimas 2005), the Andoque do not tend
to explicitly mention the Creator in their mythical narratives. However, during mambeadero sessions
and other conversations with men and women of various ages, they attributed to him the important role
of creating the world, referring to him as tiɵi, “[he] who made everything.” Andoque Andoque and
Landaburu (forthcoming), note that doékositoɵ is one of the Andoque terms for “the Creator.” In M20, a
predatory figure bearing the name Doékositoɵ, which Raquel convincingly translates as “Yellow
Achiote Deer” (dóő—yellow; a’kosi—achiote; pe’toɵ—deer; see Chapter 9), is considered the son of
Tatoañei. Tatoañei is closely associated with the carnivorous god Sḭ́ di, who holds a pivotal position in
Andoque cosmology in overseeing all activity and collecting the spirits of the dead (see Chapter 7).
However, in this myth, Doékositoɵ represents dangers to humanity, and this reference for the Creator is

111

not commonly used. The term most often used to refer to such a figure is kahaǵtı̋ ɵ. In my discussions
with various interlocutors, they associated the Creator with different figures, such as Nénéfi, Egret of the
River Source, or the three gods whose names are only revealed during preparations for ceremonial
dances. In his article on the names of Andoque divinities, Landaburu interprets kahaǵtı̋ o not as a name of
a specific god, but as a concept representing an archetypical model for later designs, mentioning the
maloca of the god Tomirepa as the kahaǵtı̋ o of his informant Yinñéfɵkn (Landaburu 1993, 153). In
personal communication, Landaburu agreed that a closer translation would be “that which was formed
for us.” Interestingly, the term kahaǵtı̋ o shares the same structure as yahaǵtı̋ o, “that which was formed
for him [the animals],” which refers to the owner-persons of animals (Chapter 8), and signifies also
“my/our origin” (ohaǵtı̋ o/kahaǵtı̋ o), which people use to designate their clans. This suggests that while
these owner-persons protect nonhuman beings, the Creator safeguards humans. While there is no
consensus on the Creator’s specific identity and role in mythology, and he cannot be associated with a
specific site within the territory like many other gods, it appears that the Creator is mythology, he is the
territory. More precisely, the Creator is the specific arrangement of mythology and territory which a
speaker views as favorable and beneficial for him or her, and which they seek mobilizing in a given
context. The term “the Creator” should thus be understood as the personification of the archetypical
model through which the speaker and elements from their surrounding environment were formed. This
model encompasses the gods and mythical heroes that the speaker relies upon, depending on their clan
origin, ritual specialization, and other factors.25
Therefore, the acquisition of animal bodily forms was not authored at once by one god called the
Creator, but rather represents the cumulative result of the deeds of various heroes and events that
occurred in multiple myths. These bodily transformations are sometimes associated with immoral
behavior, such as an old man becoming a tapir after repeatedly stealing pineapple from his daughter-inlaw’s garden (which hints at sexual indecency) and falling into a trap set by his son (M21, Chapter 9).
Similarly, the brothers of his daughter-in-law who consume the man’s raw flesh without sharing it with
his son also undergo the same transformation (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 108–13). However, more
often, and in line with other Amazonian mythologies, we find numerous stories where the physical
forms and characteristics of animal species result from their sedimented actions as depicted in these
narratives. These actions are not necessarily negative, and the bodily transformation can also result from
Cf. how the Miraña break the term “the Creator” to different names, each one linked to different components of the reality
that he created, in Karadimas 2005b, 270–71.
25

112

acts of revenge, mischievousness, or even healing by other heroes. Such are the transformations
undergone by animals after consuming coca for the first time in M1, the black dots on the back of the
Bujo ceratophrys frog resulting from the pot of tar spilled on her by her husband in another story,26 or
the veinous appearance of a bat’s wing due to the tobacco leaf attached to its body by the orphan
blowgun hunter to replace and heal its wounded wing in M7 (see Appendix 1).
Mythology also depicts instances of collective bodily transformation. In a version of the story M3 told to
me by Tañe, Egret of the River Source, after constructing the maloca and establishing the garden,
organized a dance where he transformed his wife’s previous suitors into white-lipped peccaries (Tayassu
pecari). This transformation was a consequence of their wickedness, constant fighting among
themselves, and attempts to sabotage his project. This episode from the egret mythology, which appears
somewhat detached from the broader narrative, seems to represent a moralistic layer overlaid on another
story that serves as one of the foundational elements of Andoque hunting culture and as the origin myth
of the Head (Ḭtai) ceremonial dance. In that story (M18, Appendix 1), the brothers-in-law of a dance
organizer—who are sometimes identified as a group of the proto-human Piercers—are transformed into
white-lipped peccaries by the owner-person of these animals as a response to their excessive hunting of
his “children.” Rather than being a punishment for an abstract moral transgression, the motive in this
story is driven by revenge based on the principle of reciprocal predation.
Two Andoque myths that recount a primordial flood highlight the tension between the predatory and
moral logic at work in bodily transformation processes.27 In both myths, people seek refuge from the
flood by taking shelter underground and emerge as animals once the waters recede, while a new
humanity begins to inhabit the surface of the earth. In one myth (M10, Chapter 4), the flood is triggered
by the consumption by the protagonists of the marrow liquid of Nocturnal Curassow (Nothocrax
urumutum), with the other members of its body already being consumed by other characters. This event
lends itself more easily to moral interpretation, as their chewing on the marrow can symbolize, as Urbina
noted in a parallel Murui-Muina myth, an extreme act of revenge that prevents the species from
regenerating (Urbina Rangel 2010, 125).

26
Cf. Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 158. Their version includes the tar incident but does not specify that it was the reason for
this frog’s dots on its back.
27
Andoque narrators often combine the two myths into one narrative (see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 66–78), probably in
an attempt to create a powerful effect of destruction and recuperation to help them reflect on the events of the rubber
upheaval and its aftermath.

113

By contrast, the transformation in the other flood myth clearly follows a predatory logic. This story, “the
Eagle’s Flood” (M9, Fisi 4/10/18; 12/7/21), recounts that Nénéfi’s wife created two harpy eagles, male
and female, using manioc starch. At that time there were no animals, and so she also created lizards for
PLATE XV.

the eagles to feed on. However, once they had a son, the male harpy eagle started devouring Nénéfi’s
people. The latter were terrified: they could not safely walk around or bathe in the river. In response,
Nénéfi set a trap for the eagle, using a saki monkey (Pithecia monachus) entangled in a hammock as
bait. As the eagle descended to catch the monkey, it got entangled in the hammock as well. Nénéfi
captured the eagle’s son and brought him to his maloca. The people then consumed the eagle’s son,
covered the maloca with earth, which transformed it into the hill now known as the Site of Tears, and
used the eagle’s bones to make the síiru flute. While searching for his son, the eagle recognized the
voice of his son in the sound of the flute coming from beneath the earth. Enraged, it attacked the
maloca-turned-hill from the rooftop, prompting the sheltered people to cut off one of his talons from
inside the house. In pain and bleeding, the eagle flew away, dropping his blood on the earth, forming
DUKAIYA (OKAIXA) BEAD DANCING-GIRDLE

stones and giving rise to the Harpy Eagle Clan (on other occasions, Fisi also said that it was the origin of
all Andoque clans). As the eagle flew downriver, it dammed the river with its outspread wings, resulting
in a flood. After the water receded, the people who emerged from beneath the earth were no longer
humans but animals.

CONDOR CLAWS, USED BY ANDOKE MEDICINE MAN OF THE
Figure 6. Harpy
eagle claws of
an Andoque shaman. Source: Whiffen 1915, 80.
UPPER JAPURA RIVER

In contrast to the previous myth, this story attributes the transformation of humans into animals to the
development of/Ba predatory
perspective
on the previous human population
from
above.
This perspective
B5898 :DB
C ,
75 6D 8 9 BD 7BD9 3 9 096D9 4 H9D J B: 19D 5 9 B
1
5
, ,
6 97 B 9
.5 6D 8 9 .BD9 9D

B:

9 5H5 56 9 5

C ,

75 6D 8 9 BD 7BD9 9D

C , 8B
BD
. 2
turns humans into
game
animals.
The myth elucidates the vertical structure of the cannibalistic cosmos:

eagles in the sky above, game animals under the earth below, and between them, as both predators and

114

prey, is the new humanity formed on the surface of the earth. The distinguishing feature of human
beings is their intermediate position and the corresponding bodily attributes that accompany it.
This myth underscores the potential for transformation among persons of different kinds across the
vertical space, leading us to the notion of homosubstitution that prevails within the cannibalistic cosmos:
the body and life of one person, human or otherwise, can be compensated through the body and life of
another person. I propose that this homosubstitutive logic prevailed while the life of Andoque-speaking
clans centered around the smaller rivers inland, away from the main rivers. During that period, the
human groups they interacted with, including other Andoque-speaking clans and non-Andoque groups,
shared relatively similar practices and attributes, allowing for interchangeability of members and
resources. Heterosubstitutive elements undoubtedly coexisted with the predominance of
homosubstitution. These elements include the impregnation of ritual substances with intentions during
preparation and sharing, and the replacement of hunted game with vegetal offerings to owner-persons,
both will be explored further below. However, the opening of the Andoque economy to trade along the
main rivers with non-Indigenous people, who had different practices and attributes and could provide
objects not found in their ancestral territory, entailed a greater emphasis on the principle of
heterosubstitution, expanding it into an organizing spatial logic. In this logic, the river source, center,
and river mouth participate in the exchange of things that are, in principle, incommensurate. The
authority of negotiating captains became necessary to facilitate this exchange, determine the value of
things and thus make them exchangeable.
The more intuitive exchangeability along the smaller rivers, where the value of a person’s life and body
is equivalent to those of other persons, reduces the hierarchical and captaincy-dependent nature of the
homosubstitutive-cannibalistic system compared to the heterosubstitutive system. It is in this sense that
the egret mythology is considered more suitable for captaincy than the earlier Animal Stories.
Body and Speech
Akin to the heterosubstitutive-captaincy system, the center of the cannibalistic, homosubstitutive system
embodies the two necessary qualities for exercising power: the suspension of exchange and the
involvement in it as its agent rather than patient. Here, these two qualities are expressed through the
idiom of the body, oɵsí, “that which is really mine.” Referred to also as odi, the body holds significant
symbolic value in the Andoque language, indexing authority and power when it reaches a mature form.
The body’s central role in the Andoque concept of power echoes the argument of Seeger et al. (1979),
115

who extend the anthropological focus on the body as a potent signifier of social ideas and phenomena
(e.g., Douglas 1982; V. Turner 1967), contending that the Amerindian socio-logic is, in fact, a physiologic.
Reflecting widespread Amazonian perceptions that babies and children are more vulnerable to predatory
and familiarizing actions by nonhumans (Fausto 2007a, 505), the ability to participate in the
cannibalistic system’s exchange as a powerful predator, rather than as vulnerable prey, is represented by
the mature body of an adult, in contrast to the undeveloped body of a child. The term yosuɵ, which
literally translates to “adult, fully developed land animal,” refers to both larger individual animals
leading their respective groups and human captains leading their people. As in the word yo’fí for egret
leaders, the term yo suggests the idea of physical maturity, which is associated with the potential to both
harm and benefit others. By contrast, the term yɨḛn, referring to babies, children, and youth, is used
interchangeably with “orphans” when describing a maloquero’s workers, emphasizing the vulnerability
of the younger individuals. However, it is important to note that a young being surrounded by nurturing
and cooperative kin is more likely to develop into a body incorporating greater agency compared to an
orphan, who is characterized by a lack of kin and agency.
Certain kinship terms also incorporate the notion of physical maturity. For example, yodi, meaning
“uncle,” is used to refer to any G+1 adult male who is recognized as having a more mature body than the
speaker. The terms yodisu and yodikn take this notion one generation up and are used to refer to men and
women of G+2, respectively. The physical maturity of those older than ego is associated with their
superior knowledge, as seen in the plural form yodɨsua, which designates the cohort of elders whose
guidance and wisdom are sought by the younger generation in personal and collective matters. This agebased hierarchy exhibits greater dynamism than the hierarchy based on lineages that is prevalent in the
discourse of captaincy today, and which seems to be linked with the trade system.
These terms draw on certain physical attributes associated with masculinity. The classifier -dɨ, found in
these terms, is used to describe trees with firm trunks. The word for body, odi, is derived from the
concept of something long, straight, and rigid, contrasting with -tá, a classifier used for trees with
sinuous, serpentine trunks and for worm-like shapes in general (Jon Landaburu, Pers. Comm., October
2022). Based on this distinction, the rigidity and linearity of -dɨ convey abstract ideas of confidence and
fortitude, highlighting the stability of things that “hold firm.” For example, ḭdɨhako means “right side”
(firm side, side of the body-trunk), while í’tahako means “left side” (sinuous, unfirm side). This

116

classifier also conveys masculinity, as -dɨ means “man” or “Mister,” in contrast with to -sn, which
means “woman” or “Lady” (or with -kamikn, which conveys the same meaning in the mythical register).
These gendered physical attributes are reflected in important terms related to ownership and authority in
ritual matters. The term ḭdɨño̰ can refer to the organizer of a ceremonial dance or the owner of a maloca,
representing the “person-body trunk” of that dance or maloca. Similarly, the term ḭdɨá, refers to the
cacique, the leader above clan level, emphasizing the idea that the leader is the body-trunk of his group.
Here it is noteworthy that my concept of the “captaincy system” does not imply that captains are
nonexistent or incompatible with the logic of the cannibalistic system. Rather, they are crucial agentive
actors protecting their “young” or “orphans,” or i’hɵ́ɵá—which literally means absence, referring to
either agency itself or a figure embodying it, such as a parent or captain—from predation through the
ceremonial dances they conduct and other ritual procedures undertaken at their malocas. However, in
this system, captaincy is not an organizing spatial principle.
The body is also contrasted with the images that it generates—its shadow, reflection in the water, and,
with the introduction of photography, its printed reproductions, all referred to as ká’hɵi. The shadow,
formed when sunlight hits the body from above and casts onto the ground, is associated with game
animals, whose existence is shaped by the predatory gaze upon them. In mythology, Shadow Egg’s
people are game animals, residing in his proto-maloca at the center constructed from a heap of leaves,
and consuming cultivars that are in fact wild fruits (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 143). Employing
camouflage and deceit tactics used by game animals, Shadow Egg deceives his sons-in-law, concealing
his people and preventing them from perceiving them as game animals and vegetal matter. In contrast,
Sun, who can be viewed as a mythical transformation on the figure of Shadow Egg, preys on his sons-inlaw. Representing the opposite principle, the sun resides high in the sky, and while enabling clear
perception of objects and people—an essential requirement for hunting—it cannot be stared at. The
body is located between these two optical-predatory poles; it is through bodies that sunlight produces
shadows.
The second quality of the center within the vertical-fluvial cannibalistic cosmos, which embodies the
suspension of predatory exchange, is speech. In cosmogonic narratives, the emergence of animal bodies,
which excludes the primordial humanity from attaining full human status, coincides with the
development of human language. According to the chronological framework that Andoque members
often apply to these narratives, the Piercers appeared after the flood, during which the primordial

117

humanity lost its bodily form. These proto-human heroes, who deprived dangerous faunal beings of their
powers and created various fish and game animals, were the ones who “discovered” the Andoque
language and experimented with it, thereby “producing” the territory by naming its rivers and other
sites. Tellingly, the same beings who bequeathed the items that allow the suspension of exchange within
the captaincy system—the stone axes—also passed on language to the Andoque, which permits the
suspension of exchange within the cannibalistic system. However, the Piercers mispronounced the
human language, and were themselves transformed into game animals (specifically, white-lipped
peccaries) or lost their body forms, becoming owner-persons of game animals in different sites of the
territory.
In contrast to the agency conveyed by ño̰ (person), hɵ́ihɵ́, “human being” coveys the idea of likeness,
which enables sociality. In our conversations, Fisi deconstructed this term into “speaking” (hɵɵ́i) and
“disappearing” (hɵ́ɵi). While this etymology appears uncertain (Jon Landaburu, Pers. Comm.,
November 2022), the interpretation is thought-provoking: a human being is human in the eyes of others
of their kind insofar as they can engage in speech and their bodies are subject to the same forces of
demise and decay. One of the roles of a captain is to create human beings, understood as a community of
agentive equals who exchange words instead of resorting to aggressive actions. However, to achieve this
end, the input from the river source, the direction of jaguars and other predators, in indispensable. The
Andoque clans whose ancestral territories are located deeper inland, away from the Caquetá River, claim
descent not only of the proto-human Piercers, but also of a mythical collective of maladroit figures
called Shadows (Ká’hɵi Síɵ́hɵ) (see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 217–24). Through this claim, they
acknowledge their reliance on forces from the river source, who, like Egret of the River Source,
bestowed upon them paternity, elevating their proto-culture to a fully developed culture befitting human
beings, complete with a real maloca, cultivated gardens, and ceremonial dances, which enable to
exercise greater predatory agency. Certain sites towards the river source, associated with gods and
heroes residing there, such as Hummingbird Hill and Spawning River (Pá̰di Tuɒ́i and I’pá̰se,
respectively), allude to semen (pá̰), similar to the patriline (hḛpa̰). The rainbow from that direction is
associated with vegetal fertility, which itself serves as a metaphor for human fertility.28 The strong
association between the river source, ancestry, and the notion that agency extends from that direction
The verb bɨ signifies “to bear fruits,” and is thus associated with wild fruits (bɨi), which reproduce independently of
humans due to their creation and protection by the predatory Sun above, rather than with cultivated fruits (koisé). The term
Bɨda, meaning “erection,” literally translates to “to open in order to bear fruits” and carries aggressive connotations (Andoque
Andoque and Landaburu, forthcoming).
28

118

towards the center merits referring to the Andoque as not simply “People of the Center” but as “People
of an Upstreamed Center.”
Two Mythological Layers, Two River Systems
Landaburu’s observation that egret mythology overlays an earlier mythological layer provides essential
tools for understanding how older notions of predation underlie subsequent notions regarding the agents
and objects of exchange. In the egret mythology, the river source retains its violent character from the
old predatory layer, represented by Burner Egret of the River Source, who leaves the center in anger
upon discovering that the mother of merchandise has already departed with Egret of the River Mouth
(M5). The Andoque make a distinction between the beneficial Trader Whites from the river mouth and
the aggressive Burner Whites from the river source, whose embodiment today can be seen in armed
dissident groups originating from the cordillera. They also differentiate between the rifle from the river
source, known as duidi, and the one from the river mouth, referred to as ḭkn. While duidi, which literally
means “burner tube,” is dangerous and is linked in mythology to Sı̰ ́di, ḭkn also refers to a spear and even
dancing rod, and, like the latter, is viewed as an instrument that can contribute to people’s livelihood and
well-being. M5 also explains the common association in ceremonial songs between the violence
exercised by Whites from downriver and jaguars (see Chapter 12), a category of predators that,
according to the logic of the predatory system, should inhabit the river source rather than its mouth.
According to this myth, the ocelot conceived by the mother of merchandise escaped from the center,
which is located upstream from the river mouth, and whose population is thus perceived as jaguars by
those inhabiting the river mouth. The dolphin (Inia geoffrensis), which appears in other myths related to
exchange with the river mouth and symbolizes dangerous seduction by Whites, is classified as an
anaconda, which is a predator from downriver.
Landaburu’s observations on Andoque mythological layers should also be considered within the broader
context of the establishment of the captaincy system as superimposed upon the cannibalistic one. In the
context of the slave trade, a captain’s ability to designate individuals as orphans relied on his predatory
capabilities. These were demonstrated in wars where he could obtain captives and protect his own men,
while other captains fell, leaving their dependents orphaned. Similarly, the practice of making vegetal
offerings to the owner-persons of animals presupposes the logical antecedence of cannibalistic
retaliation by these entities. This threat prompted the development of such offerings as a compensatory
measure for protection.

119

Each system articulates processes of predation, familiarization, and exchange differently. As will be
explored in Chapter 9, homosubstitution and hunting cosmology require the familiarization of prey after
capture or consumption, transforming the horizontal predatory relation into a vertical relation of
domination where humans consume game animals rather than vice versa. By contrast, the egret
mythology and heterosubstitutive-captaincy system place familiarization at the forefront. Unlike
Tatoañei’s ravenous sons, Egret of the River Source’s predation on Shadow Egg and his people takes the
form of familiarization as he incorporates them into his maloca and political endeavors. Simultaneously,
Egret of the River Source utilizes them as elements to fulfill his designs and constitutes his people as
cultivars that he has planted and grown. These cultivars do not pose dangers to him and can be
eventually detached from himself. While the river source is associated with the patriline, those traded
with agents from the opposite direction exist outside the patriline or are rejected from it. This trade
should be viewed as the delegation of their predation to a third party. In other words, while the
homosubstitutive system involves predation followed by familiarization, the heterosubstitutive system
involves familiarization followed by exchange, which may have predatory implications but should not
be reduced to mere predation. As the alignment of agency is a critical element of power, it is noteworthy
that the Andoque cosmos contains two systems with differing sequences of agency alignment within
their respective action schemes. In line with the analogy outlined in the introduction between
familiarization and predation, on the one hand, and violence and power, on the other, the cannibalistic
system embodies a horizontal model of violence that is more easily reversible, while the captaincy
system adheres to a vertical, domination-oriented model of power.
These two models coexist within Andoque society, and I will examine their manifestations in various
contexts in the following chapters. In the next stage of our exploration, we shall proceed to discuss the
process whereby the center and the persons embodying it are actively produced.

120

Chapter 3. The Production of Centers
As explored in the previous chapters, both the captaincy and cannibalistic cosmo-economic systems,
which utilize the river as a central axis, are conceptualized around the idea of an affinal space
encompassing a consanguineal center. Whether this center is represented by a social, speaking humanbodied person or an axe-person, with all the productive and hierarchical implications it carries, this
center also must be produced. Just as the captaincy system builds upon the foundations of the
cannibalistic system, so the existence of the productive axe-person assumes the prior socialization of the
individual into becoming a speaking human-bodied person. This socialization involves attributing
origins to the newborn child, incorporating them into a clan, and introducing them to the broader
community and territory through ceremonial name giving. In this chapter, I delve into the interconnected
concepts of formation, origin, and clan, and examine the power-laden practices through which a
newborn child is shaped into a human-bodied person and becomes a member of a specific center.
Clan and Origin
In Andoque cosmology, everything and everyone—people, animals, plants, diseases, artifacts, cures,
spells, dances, and so on—have their origin, which can be traced back to an entity who created them, a
specific site where they were formed, and a myth that narrates their creation. The origin myth of a
person, animal, or object allows others to understand their behavior or characteristics in the present and
enables manipulation for various purposes. Ohaǵtiɵ̋, which translates to “my origin,” literally means “my
principle,” “my Creator,” or “that which was formed for me” (see the earlier discussion on kahaǵtiɵ̋). It
signifies formation and transformation—as there is no notion of ex-nihilo creation, the former is always
a specific instance of the latter—as well as making and fabricating. The notion of origin is closely linked
to the connotation of “true” or “real” associated with the concept of the center (dʉ), because people
consider themselves truly human when they reside on their territory of origin and rely on the animals,
plants, and substances created alongside them on that specific territory.
The origins and formation of any person can be traced to two processes: physical formation and the
assignment to a clan through the act of name giving. Physical formation involves feeding the child (ɵsé)
and adhering to specific dietary practices, primarily by the mother, although certain rules also apply to
the father. These practices are reminiscent of other Amazonian peoples where children are actively
shaped as kin to distinguish them from the potential kinship ties in the forest, preventing them from
becoming closely associated with animals or, in other words, falling ill (Vilaça 2002; see Chapter 9).
121

After the weaning stage and until they can walk independently, children should predominantly consume
plant-based foods (nowadays, the preparation of oatmeal shakes has become increasingly common), and
the introduction of fish and meat occurs gradually (Gómez López et al. 1998, 122–40). During this
process, the child’s father or grandfather “prays on” various fish and game, making them safe for the
child to consume, often by referring to these animals as fruits and other cultivated plants (Fausto 2007a,
503–4; S. Hugh-Jones 2019a, 106). This practice signifies a greater male involvement in the child’s
physical formation. However, male authority assumes a more significant role in the name-giving
process, which necessitates prior discussions on the clan.
Haǵtiɵ̋, meaning “origin,” is also used to refer to clans, as they are the relevant social units for tracing
origins within the Andoque collective. Unlike Tukanoan and Arawakan groups in the Rio NegroVaupes-Apaporis region (e.g. Andrello 2006, 379–400; C. Hugh-Jones 1979, 33–40; S. Hugh-Jones
1993), the Andoque do not have a unifying origin myth for all the clans. According to Fisi, the cacique,
all the Andoque clans originated from the hill known as the Site of Tears. In the center of the site lived
the leader Egret of the Center, along with his father Nénéfi, and from different corners of the hill, all the
Andoque clans emerged. However, in private mambeadero sessions, members of all clans often
contradict this version, stating that each clan has its own origin site and story, and that only the Eagle
Clan, which is Fisi’s clan, originated there. Fisi’s description lacks support from any mythological
narrative, while myths about the origin processes and sites of specific clans abound. For example, the
Sun Clan traces its origin to Araracuara, the site of the fight between the Sun and the Moon. The Deer
Clan traces its origin to an area near the Site of Tears, which they occupied before the rubber genocide,
and other clans likewise claim to have originated in the territories they occupied prior to that upheaval
(see Figure 6). Without a clear and rigid hierarchy between the clans, as described in the Rio NegroVaupes-Apaporis region, the argument that the Site of Tears is the origin site or cosmological center of
the entire Andoque people should be understood as another way for the Eagle Clan to assert its
hegemony over the other clans (Landaburu 1993).29

Neither can we clearly identify at present a rigid hierarchy between lineages pertaining to the same clan, such as the case
for the Bora (Lucas 2019, 174). Although the sons of elder brothers in some clans play a more central role in community
affairs, the small number of remaining clans and the small general population preclude any clear conclusion.
29

122

Figure 7. Map of the origin sites and ancestral territories of the different Andoque clans, elaborated by Andoque members
with the assistance of Gaia Amazonas and the program Consolidación Amazonía between 1994 and 1997. In green: the
names of the clans in each area, in Andoque.

The members of each clan are referred to as “People of X”—X being the animal, plant, or natural
element associated with their origin: People of the Eagle (kádánni síɵ́hɵ), People of the Sun (ḭɒ̰ óho),
People of the Deer (to’beó̰ síɵ́hɵ), People of the Beetle (ɒita síɵ́hɵ), and People of the Atta Ant (eda
óho). Out of the reported thirty-five clans in the past, only these five clans exist today, along with a few
individuals from the Spix’s Guan, Mauritia, and Anaconda Clans (sói oho, kɒ̰nta síɵ́hɵ, and hɵpɵ ɵ́hɵ,
respectively). These individuals of other clans are either women or childless men, and due to the
patrilineal bias of this system, they are not expected to pass on their clan names and identities.

123

Within the Aduche Reserve
Clan/Gender
Eagle
Atta Ant
Sun
Deer
Beetle
Spix’s Guan
Mauritia
Anaconda
Total Andoque

Men
44
27
19
10
9
0
0
0
109

Outside the Aduche Reserve

Women
34
10
7
6
8
1
1
0
67

Men
6
5
7
3
3
1
0
0
25

Women
21
12
10
5
6
2
1
1
58

Total
105
54
43
20
26
4
2
1
259

Table 1. Male and female members of each Andoque clan, within and without the Aduche Reserve (April 2018)

Similar to the Féénemɨna, the Andoque believe that each clan has had since Creation its own territory,
names, speech, temperament, and specific teachings, which include cures, capacities, and specializations
such as leadership or warfare (Londoño Sulkin 2000, 329–30). Prior to the genocide, clans were
organized around malocas, each led by a captain (po’soɵ), who held certain ritual prerogatives and
axes—both actual working tools and workers to operate them. During that time, inter-clan exogamy
prevailed. Despite Fisi’s insistence that there has always been an ḭdɨa, or supra-clan cacique, from the
Eagle Clan who unified all the Andoque, his and other peoples’ oral historical accounts of inter-clan
warfare suggest that, like in the Miraña case (Karadimas 2013, 188), some clan captains merely acted as
peacemakers between warring clans, serving as counselors to temporarily align the perspectives and
interests of multiple clans in forming alliances. Today, marriage between individuals of the same clan
origin is still considered incestuous, and suspicion among clans persists (Chapter 10).
The animal, plant or natural element referred to by the clan’s name is interconnected, through the clan’s
origin myth, with other animals, plants, or elements. For instance, the Atta Ant Clan is also known as the
Jaguar Clan because the myth tells of how this ant was formed from the jaguar’s blood drops. It is also
connected with the ba’kósı̋ okń spider and the edakń tree (neither identified). The Eagle Clan, on the
other hand, is associated with water, rocks and cascades, as well as the manioc species from which the
heroine of M9 created the first eagles. These elements operate in a totem-like manner, where their origin
myth and other characteristics, whether physiological, ethological, or related to their use, serve as a
source of names for clan members. Clan members also turn to these myths for protection, healing, or
support. For example, members of the Eagle Clan are named after different episodes of the myth of the
cannibal eagle (M9) as well as after various rock formations, eagles’ feathers, and other bodily postures
of these birds. On the other hand, members of the Sun Clan are named after different episodes of the war
story between the two brothers, Sun and Moon, over a woman. They are also named after the various
124

manifestations and effects of these two celestial bodies throughout the day or year.30 The construction of
proper names from clan appellations (Lévi-Strauss 1962, 173) is also found among other People of the
Center (Gasché 2009, 15; cf. S. Hugh-Jones 2002, 50 for the Tukanoan case). However, it is distinct
from other Amazonian cases, such as the Mebengokre, as explored by Lea, where names primarily serve
to evoke the ancestors of the household in which they are transmitted (Lea 1992, 136).
People often declare “our God is our origin,” a statement that embodies two significant ideas. Firstly, it
personifies the very process of the collective’s formation, attributing agency to the forces that brought
them into existence as members of that collective. Secondly, it reflects people’s reliance on these forces
for their own protection. In this manner, the strength, bravery, and cunning displayed by both the
primordial humanity and the cannibal eagle during their mythical struggle are regarded as sources of
power and inspiration for the Eagle Clan. In the case of the Sun Clan, a woman whose children belong
to that clan shared with me that when her son was in prison, she would pray, drawing upon an episode
from the Sun and Moon myth where Moon successfully evaded a trap set by Sun. “I knew that he [her
son] could not die in prison, because neither did his origin die there,” she said. However, clan origin
stories also expose their members’ vulnerabilities and can be exploited by outsiders for curses or
negative intentions. For instance, outsiders may intentionally incite conflict among brothers from the
Sun Clan over a woman by drawing upon the strife between Sun and Moon in mythology. Due to this
risk, as we will explore further in Chapter 10, people are cautious about sharing their origin myths with
outsiders.
Names and Their Powerful Bestowal
Name giving, ɵti, is a powerful moment of familiarization in which a child is bestowed with a (clan)
origin, thus becoming integrated into the clan’s origin narrative and endowed with the recognition and
dispositions that will serve them in engaging in future beneficial exchanges. The verb itself combines
“making” (ɵ) and “name” (ti), a noun which is itself identical to the verbal root “to make, form,
transform,” emphasizing the transformative nature of assigning a name to someone. By receiving a name
associated with a specific clan, the child is fully embraced as a member of that clan, as clan affiliation is
not solely determined by biological lineage. In principle, names can be drawn from both parents’ clans,
and it was once common for mothers to name some of their daughters after their own clans. Among the
For the myth on Sun and Moon, see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 43–55. For the myths and lists of names of members of
the two clans, see Estrada 2017, 197–204, 215–21.
30

125

fourteen women who returned to the ancestral territory as part of Yiñékɒ’s group in the 1930s, three
were named after their mothers’ clans. However, this practice has practically ceased. In regional
ethnography, matrilineal name giving is interpreted as a means to repay a debt to the wife-giving clan in
the first generation after marriage, rather than waiting for four generations for a female descendent to
marry into that clan (Karadimas 2000, 609–10; Lucas 2019, 239–40). While acknowledging that this
practice predates the rubber genocide, members of the Andoque community associate it with the
aftermath of that catastrophic event and claim that it serves as a noble cause for one to restore his
spouse’s clan. However, in practice, Andoque men prefer connecting their children to their own origins,
thus preserving the vitality, memory, and names of their own clans, which indeed serves as one of the
functions of name giving (cf. S. Hugh-Jones 2002, 51). Except for children born to non-Indigenous or
absent fathers, who are automatically affiliated with their mothers’ clans, there were only two girls born
after the genocide who received names after their matriclans upon birth. Both were born in the 1940s,
and in one of these cases, the father changed the girl’s name to his own clan during her childhood. In
another notable case, Raquel, a maloquera married to a Murui man of a lesser lineage, gave her only
male son from that man a name after her own clan. Two other children of hers—one son from a previous
husband and a daughter from the Murui man—voluntarily chose names from the repository of their
mother’s clan rather than names associated with their fathers’ clans. Nonetheless, these cases are
exceptional.
Due to their content, clan names are distinct from two other classes of names that are nonetheless used
more frequently to address or refer to people: “White names,” which encompass Christian names,
Spanish names, and names with an Anglo-Saxon flavor, often given to children owing to their sound or
the exotic character of the non-Indigenous person recommending them; and nicknames, which are given
to people based on some odd or funny physical or behavioral trait, or due to their resemblance to another
person or an animal.
Clan names are bestowed by elder members, typically males, who reportedly spend two nights at the
mambeadero, recounting the clan’s myth and examining its name repository. While there is a strong
appreciation for revitalizing the clan’s name repository, some individuals prefer not to give children
names of exceptionally powerful ancestors. Such a name could potentially endanger the young bearer, as
the formidable owner-persons with whom the ancestor used to communicate may seek out the new
bearer, expecting to continue the exchange they had with the previous owner. Without a suitable

126

offering, these ancestors and owner-persons could cause harm to the new name bearer. This perspective
reflects the belief that assuming a particular name establishes a mimetic situation, where the name owner
is placed in the same relational position with respect to both human and nonhuman entities as the
previous name owner. There is no strict rule or preference for name attribution, as seen among other
regional peoples who often pass down the name of a real or classificatory G+2 relative (cf. S. HughJones 2002, 50–51; Lucas 2019, 169). However, there appears to be a minimal genealogical distance
observed. Only Raquel bestowed her father’s name on her son (who is the child’s G+2). Her brother’s
opposition to this practice seems to reflect a widely held belief that giving a child the name of a
deceased parent, whom one has seen alive, diminishes the significance of that parent’s death and
amounts to a resurrection. Out of respect for death and its nonhuman agents, it is customary to give
names that do not evoke personal memories—specifically, names of individuals from G+3 and beyond.
As among the Féénemɨna, name giving represents a powerful act of subjectivation, through which one
person forms another by bestowing specific behaviors, characteristics, capacities, and defenses upon
them (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 40–41, 62; see also Walker 2013, 140–41). This practice is not limited to
children but extends to adults as well, as names can be changed throughout one’s life to accommodate
changing personal circumstances. The logic of naming is also utilized for purposes of sorcery and
healing. In these contexts, by giving a patient object X the name of a referent object Y, one manipulates
X, endowing it with the behavior or characteristics of Y.31
The power and impact of clan names, which involve acting on the named person (see also Whiffen
1915, 154), partly explain why clan names are rarely used. Instead, people are usually addressed by their
nicknames, White names, or formal titles such as Gobernador ([Reserve] “Governor”) even by their own
mothers. Using clan names to address elders is considered utterly disrespectful (further discussed
below). While all Andoque members possess Indigenous clan names, most of these names are often
disregarded by others, treated as mere nicknames. They are frequently forgotten by individuals outside
the clan or beyond the nuclear family, and even their bearers may hesitate to utter them when requested.
Following Lucas’s terminology, we can refer to these names as “ordinary names,” contrasting them with
“tutelary names” (2019, 169–70) that are widely considered “real.”32

31
32

See also Chapter 9. For this practice among neighboring peoples, see Londoño Sulkin 2012, 72–75; Lucas 2019, 292–93.
On the hierarchizing aspect of unequal name giving, see Turner 2003, 19.

127

A tutelary name is bestowed on a child by a maloquero during one of several ceremonial dances. These
dances serve as an introduction of the child, or sometimes two children of different sexes, to the entire
community and particularly to the personified territory and origin. The purpose of the ceremonial name
giving is for the territory and origin spirits to recognize, protect, support, and safeguard the named
individuals. Some elders take pride in their knowledge of which names are more favorable, as they
believe such names ensure greater support and stronger defense from the owner-persons of the territory
and origin. Tutelary names are given during the dances River Turtle-Carrier Band (Bisokń Paadi),
Fausíya, Head (Ĩtai), and Armadillo (Féíko). While there is some variation in the age at which children
can be named, with some setting the maximum age at one year, Fisi argues that children can be given a
name even up to the age of four. However, based on an analysis of familial stories and ritual practices, it
appears that children can only receive a name during a dance if they do not have a younger sibling. Once
a younger sibling is born, the focus of ceremonial name giving shifts to the younger brother, and
children who have surpassed the age limit or have a younger sibling are considered “adult” and can be
named alongside other adults in the Multiplying Tree (Tu’sí) or Fausíya Dances. However, such name
giving does not carry the same level of leadership and prestige as the River Turtle-Carrier Band and
Head Dances or an individual naming at the Fausíya, nor is it specifically associated with child
protection like the Armadillo Dance (see Chapter 11).
The significance of tutelary names lies in the belief that the child becomes identified with the specific
dance in which they are named, for better or worse. On one hand, those named in a particular dance are
granted a privileged status as organizers of that dance, and the spiritual owner of the dance is more
likely to accept their offerings, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of their own dances. On the other
hand, if they neglect their designated dance or fail to name their child or nephew in it, the owner-person
may cause them harm, as the act of naming serves as a lifelong invocation of that entity that should be
accompanied by proper offerings and ceremonial continuity.
Since name-giving dances belongs to either the peɒɵsí (red) or pó’fiɵ (white) ritual specialization, those
who receive a name in these dances are considered to belong to one of the two specializations and
possess the prerogative to organize or actively participate in other dances associated with that
specialization. As will be discussed in Chapter 11, each specialization is associated with specific
personal characteristics, so the elder who bestows a name in a dance and assigns a particular
specialization is shaping the individual as a specific type of person.

128

The defense provided by tutelary names has a more collective nature, extending not only to the named
child but also to their siblings. Not all siblings of maloca families are given names in these dances, and
there is a belief, particularly upheld by Fisi and his family members, that only one child from each
family should receive a tutelary name. Typical of his “centralist” tendency, Fisi justifies this by
explaining that if everyone were to be named in the dance, the significance of the names would
diminish, as the territory and its owner-persons cannot attend to the calls of all individuals. “There was
only one Nénéfi, only one Egret of the Center,” he says, associating the uniqueness of these deities with
the appropriate uniqueness of individuals engaging in communication with them. However, other
members believe that ideally, the first-born and second-born siblings should be named, with each one
receiving a name in a different dance. This viewpoint aligns with the broader framework of the two
ritual specializations discussed in Chapter 11, as well as with the Bora and Miraña practices, where the
first-born siblings of both sexes receive “beautiful” names and the second-born siblings receive “ugly”
names (Karadimas 2005, 38–39; Lucas 2019, 170–72).
The aforementioned observations primarily concern male children. When a boy is given a name, it is
common for his real or classificatory sister to be given a name alongside him. Girls without brothers
may receive a name by themselves, typically in the Head, Fausíya, Armadillo, or Multiplying Tree
Dances, but not in River Turtle-Carrier Band. During the name-giving ceremony, the name-giving elder,
ideally the host, stands inside the maloca with the mother and child. They declare the name to another
elder, preferably the guest, using the phrase “you shall call me” (onáháé’ni), a formula inherited from
the Piercers (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 225 n.20bis). The guest repeats the name, and the host calls
him to consume X’s coca—X being the child’s new name. “Come consume X’s coca,” the guest then
summons his men, and each one approaches the coca, stating “I am going to consume X’s coca.” The
same sequence repeats with the tobacco paste and vegetal salt. The following morning the same is done
with meat and the rest of the food. The name thus becomes widely known to group members and to the
owner-persons of the territory through repetition and the consumption of substances imbued with the
intention to instill the name and the child’s identity in the participants (for similar observations among
the Féénemɨna, see Londoño Sulkin 2000, 393). This performative speech act solidifies the child’s
affiliation with a human center. Names that are not declared in such a way are rarely recognized or are
quickly forgotten.

129

The accurate pronunciation and proper response during the name declaration are crucial, as any errors
can place the child in grave danger, potentially leading to their death. An incident from the 1970s
provides an illustrative example in which a Nonuya man gave a name to his Andoque nephew. My
interlocutors attributed the child’s death a few years later to the mispronunciation by the uncle of certain
utterances in Féénemɨna, the language used for the ceremony. In another instance, a maloquero shared a
story where his longstanding rival had asked him to teach the formula for giving his grandson a name in
a specific dance. However, during the actual name-giving ceremony, the grandfather forgot the correct
formula. In response, the rival-teacher intervened, tearing the vegetal salt from his hands and performing
the ritual himself to spare the child from potential accidents or diseases. These stories, reflecting
conflicting positions in power struggles, should not be taken at face value. Nevertheless, they highlight
the influence and control that name givers possess over the named children, capable of ensuring their
well-being by correctly linking them to a strong origin and a consanguineous center, or potentially
causing harm if performed incorrectly and allowing them to drift into the affinal faunal world.
It should be emphasized that the power of name giving is predominantly held by men. Both the
ceremony itself and the selection of names, including cases where girls received a name based on their
mother’s clan, are caried out by men. This can be viewed as a variation on the common Amazonian
pattern of “subordinating women’s biological reproductive powers within more prestigious processes
and relations of social reproduction controlled by men” (T. Turner 2003, 22). While women play an
important role in the physical formation of their children, which ties them to the human group, name
giving represents an additional practice of familiarization that carries notions of prestige and is solely
conducted by men. However, it is important to note that in the Andoque perspective, this familiarization
is performed precisely to protect the child and the group from the affinal world, from which women who
marry into the group, including the child’s mother, originate.
While physical formation and name giving are means of creating a center through “familiarizing
downwards,” extending kinship from parents and elders to children, the center is also continuously
reaffirmed and produced through “upwards familiarization.” I use this term to describe the naming
avoidance and use of consanguineous kinship terms when addressing elders of G+1 and beyond, i.e.,
yodɨ (uncle), píta (aunt), yo’tapɵ (grandfather), yota (grandmother). This practice not only refrains from
exercising power over the addressed person by using their clan name, but also places the speaker in a
position of inferiority and humility in relation to the elder. It is an acknowledgement of the elder’s

130

superior knowledge and power, with the implicit intention of eliciting protection and care from them.
Similar to the formulae used when addressing the owner-persons of the territory’s sites, where people
identify themselves as their grandchildren to avoid harm, children are instructed to show respect to both
known and unknown elders by calling them “grandfather” or “grandmother.” Elders recall being scolded
by their parents when they were children for staring at old people and their physical signs of aging, as it
was believed that these elders could cast a spell to make the child age rapidly or acquire similar
blemishes. Therefore, the “respect” shown by using kinship terms should be understood as a feigned
humility rooted in fear, particularly fear of sorcery. These instructions also extend to youth in general.
One of my interlocutors explained that a man should avoid using the term “father-in-law” when
referring to a man who has the ability to bewitch him, and even when the man in question is unknown
and classified as an affine, it is safer to address him as “uncle” or “grandfather,” alongside the offering
of coca and tobacco as tokens of respect for men in general, and fish and game, for all elders of G+2.
Thus, the use of affinal terminology frames the situation as one of predation between rival centers, while
the use of consanguineous terminology frames it in terms of protection and nurturing within the same
center, where the younger member provides foodstuffs to the elder in exchange for teachings and
defense. Through such practices, a person can expand their center in certain situations, encompassing
individuals who are both potentially dangerous and beneficial.
Having discussed, in this chapter, the power-laden processes by which people are assigned specific
centers, in the following chapter, we move from conceptual analysis to the examination of one historical
process of center formation which is crucial for understanding the Andoque’s present reality—namely,
their post-genocide recuperation.

131

132

Chapter 4. The Center Reemerges After the Flood
How do the notions of center and its formation, as discussed in the previous chapters, elucidate the
Andoque’s recent history, and what significance did the captaincy and cannibalistic systems, along with
the concepts of exchange and power of each, hold for them in formative historical moments? In this
chapter, I propose some answers to these questions by exploring the Andoque’s recovery from the
devastation inflicted upon them by the agents of the Peruvian Amazon Rubber Company, known as the
Casa Arana. This process encompasses early attempts to reassemble under the leadership of Dóñékɒi
(“Yellow Fluff”) in the 1910s–1920s; the deportation of the majority of Dóñékɒi’s group in 1928, and
the subsequent regrouping of surviving Andoque survivors in the latter half of the 1930s. Led by
Yiñékɒ, Dóñékɒi’s son, they reconstructed the Andoque as a linguistic and ethnic group firmly
established in their ancestral territory.
The main elements of the demographic and cultural recovery process have been masterfully explored by
Landaburu (1993), focusing on Yiñékɒ as the primary catalyst for the Andoque’s post-genocide
transformation. Landaburu asserted that Yiñékɒ had played a vital role in shifting the Andoque’s focus
away from internecine clan politics and towards peaceful engagement with others, especially with nonIndigenous agents. According to Landaburu, evidence of this shift can be seen in Yiñékɒ’s decision to
resettle closer to Araracuara and the Caquetá River, rather than in the ancestral territory of his clan, the
Eagle Clan. Furthermore, Landaburu argued that Yiñékɒ had reworked the Andoque mythology by
replacing the cannibal god Ñé’ñéfi, strongly associated with the Eagle Clan, and other heroes
symbolizing different Andoque clans and occupying hierarchical positions signifying their predatory
nature, with egret figures associated with their residence along the horizontal fluvial axis. He suggested
that Yiñékɒ had not entirely discarded these ancient gods but confined them to the celestial realm, where
they provide assistance and guidance to people through the mediation of the shaman or captain.
Additionally, Landaburu attributed to Yiñékɒ the inclusion of orphan figures in some myths,
symbolizing current vulnerability yet a potential for reclaiming agency and empowering others, and
representing Yiñékɒ’s humble origin. Finally, he described endogamy as a strategic value for this
process of rehabilitation (Landaburu 1993).
In general, my analysis in this chapter agrees with Landaburu’s conclusions. However, I draw on oral
accounts gathered from Andoque members, additional data from mythology, and post-genocide kinship
and economic dynamics, to further substantiate some of Landaburu’s findings and provide a nuanced

133

perspective on others, and to integrate these historical data into the conceptual framework of this
dissertation. I argue that Dóñékɒi emphasized the significance of collaboration and exchange with nonIndigenous agents crucial for the revival of the Andoque people. Future endeavors to constitute the
center would thus recognize that the primary spatial system for this center is the captaincy system, rather
than a cannibalistic one. Yiñékɒ assumed the mission of creating this center. Through an analysis of
competing versions of another flood myth, “The Orphans’ Flood,” I will contend that while Yiñékɒ
acknowledged the orphan status of himself and other survivors, his utilization of preexisting mythical
narratives reveals an attempt not to merely replace earlier gods, but to gain access to their predatory
agency and abilities. This attempt reflects the Andoque’s drawing on the cannibalistic system as well. I
will examine the predatory dimensions of the Multiplying Tree Dance, which were considered essential
for achieving demographic growth after the genocide. Additionally, I will examine the kinship, ritual,
and economic factors that allowed Yiñékɒ to establish himself as the core (ḭdɨá, or cacique) of the
survivor group, and analyze the actions he undertook between the 1930s-1950s to shape a unified center,
exert control over others, and familiarize them by aligning their agencies to his own. Lastly, I will
highlight specific historical moments that either marked or influenced the dissolution of this center
starting from the 1960s. This chapter demonstrates how the cosmo-economic systems and the production
of centers, as previously discussed, manifested in recent Andoque history. It serves as a historical
narrative of a pivotal period for the Andoque, emphasizing power dynamics relevant in later chapters.
Dóñékɒi: Preferring Exchange over Predation
Instead of providing a comprehensive account of the atrocities inflicted upon the Andoque and other
indigenous peoples of the Center by the agents of this company during the early twentieth century, I will
offer a summary of the key events. For an in-depth understanding of these events, I recommend
consulting the testimonies of primary witnesses such as Walter Hardenburg (1913), who conducted a
visit to the area in 1907, and Roger Casement (1912; 1997), who investigated these crimes on behalf of
the British parliament in 1910; scholarly analyses by Pineda Camacho (2000) and Michael Taussig
(1986); Carlos Páramo Bonilla’s (2008) portrayal of Armando Normand, a notably sadistic agent of the
Casa Arana who oversaw the section known as “Andoques” or “Matanzas” (literally meaning
“Massacres”), where the Andoque community was located, and Zoila Erazo’s first hand testimony
concerning this man (Chirif 2017, 229–44). These sources offer a more detailed exploration of the
subject matter.

134

After more than a decade of relatively small-scale rubber extraction headed by Colombian bosses who
engaged the Indigenous work force through a combination of enticing them with manufactured goods
and employing violence, Julio César Arana entered the Caquetá-Putumayo region in 1899. By 1905,
Arana had successfully established a monopoly over rubber extraction and gained complete control over
the Indigenous workforce in the region (Pineda Camacho 2000, 55–75). During this period, the
production of rubber reached unprecedented levels, while the Indigenous population experienced a sharp
decline. They were subjected to enslavement, torture, rape, and other forms of brutal mistreatment, as
well as severe hunger due to the excessive demands of rubber work, which left them with insufficient
time to cultivate crops or gather food. The magnitude of terror and extermination inflicted upon the
People of the Center becomes evident when examining Hardenburg’s summary of the atrocities in
thirteen points:
1. The pacific Indians of the Putumayo are forced to work day and night at the extraction of rubber, without the
slightest remuneration except the food necessary to keep them alive.
2.

They are kept in most complete nakedness, many of them not even possessing the biblical fig leaf.

3.

They are robbed of their crops, their women, and their children to satisfy the voracity, lasciviousness, and avarice of
this company and its employees, who live on their food and violate their women.

4.

They are sold wholesale and retail in Iquitos, at prices that range from £20 to £40 each.

5.

They are flogged inhumanly until their bones are laid bare, and great raw sores cover them.

6.

They are given no medical treatment, but are left to die, eaten by maggots, when they serve as food for the chiefs’
dogs.

7.

They are castrated and mutilated, and their ears, fingers, arms, and legs are cut off.

8.

They are tortured by means of fire and water, and by tying them up, crucified head down.

9.

Their houses and crops are burned and destroyed wantonly and for amusement.

10. They are cut to pieces and dismembered with knives, axes, and machetes.
11. Their children are grasped by the feet and their heads are dashed against trees and walls until their brains fly out.
12. Their old folk are killed when they are no longer able to work for the company.
13. Men, women, and children are shot to provide amusement for the employees or to celebrate the sábado de gloria, or,
in preference to this, they are burned with kerosene so that the employees may enjoy their desperate agony
(Hardenburg 1913, 184–85; see also Casement’s endorsement of these statements [1997, 255]).

In the wake of the international scandal caused by Hardenburg’s denouncement and Casement’s
investigation, Peru opened a judicial inquiry into the Casa Arana’s operations in 1911 and issued orders
for the capture of several company leaders. However, the Peruvian authorities soon withdrew the
charges (Pineda Camacho 2000, 178). As World War I diverted international attention away from the

135

region, the company continued its operations, albeit with a gradual decline in rubber extraction due to
falling prices (ibid, 183–89). While mistreatment of Indigenous people persisted during this period, it
appeared to be less severe than in first decade of the century, with greater concessions to Indigenous
people to engage in horticultural practices for sustenance. This relative “unworsening” (desempeorar) of
enslavement conditions, as described by Pineda, may explain the little support for the cause of the
Murui-Muina captain Yarocamena in 1917, who initiated a rebellion against the company (ibid, 2000,
160), along with the longstanding distrust between clans and language groups that Casa Arana agents
exploited to incite conflict. Instances of resistance occurred sporadically, including some uprisings by
the Andoque (e.g., Cornejo Chaparro and Yllia Miranda 2009, 187, 189). Many other Indigenous people
sought refuge on the north bank of the Caquetá River and downstream near Campoamor on the MiritíParaná River, beyond the Peruvians’ reach, where Colombian rubber bosses offered a relatively less
violent environment for rubber gathering (Pineda Camacho 2000, 145–47). In 1924, after the SalomónLozano treaty recognized Colombian sovereignty north to the Putumayo River, Casa Arana agents
initiated the deportation of thousands of individuals from the People of the Center to Peru, including a
reported 361 Andoque people headed by Dóñékɒi, Yiñékɒ’s father (ibid, 194; Razón 1984 in Lucas
2019, 73). The operations of Casa Arana in the Caquetá-Putumayo region came to an end when they
were pursued by Colombia, whose government had previously refrained from taking action regarding
these territories, during the armed conflict of 1932. By the conclusion of this conflict, the Andoque
population had been devastated. From an estimate of 10,000 people reported by Whiffen during his visit
in 1908 (1915, 59), only some thirty survivors remained in the Caquetá region and returned, in the mid1930s, to their ancestral land, under the leadership of Yiñékɒ.
Presently, the Andoque people exhibit a collective reluctance to discuss the period known as “the Time
of Peru” (el tiempo de Perú). Andoque elders, in particular, refrain from delving into this topic. Some
explain that they have never asked their parents and grandparents about that period because the
survivors would start crying. They also express their aversion to discussing those dark times when
Indigenous people, including the Andoque, fought against and oppressed each other while serving the
interests of the Peruvians. Similar to the inclination observed by Echeverri (2010) among the People of
the Center to heal from that upheaval rather than remembering it, Andoque elders generally consider
dwelling on such memories as “useless” (no sirve). The elder Germán, for instance, said, “I used to tell
my father, ‘Don’t tell me about the Casa Arana; tell me [other] stories, teach me spells, teach me things
that I could use!’” Instead of recounting the few oral accounts collected, this discussion will center on
136

the roles attributed to Dóñékɒi, Yinñéfɵkn and Miguel Zumaeta in these narratives, which shed light on
the subsequent establishment of the center under Yiñékɒ’s leadership. The account derived from the
transcript of the mambeadero conversation with Fisi and Nestor (see C1, in Appendix 2) represents the
roles assigned to these three individuals during the genocide and recovery by other interlocutors.
However, while some interlocutors shared narratives describing a gradual encroachment of Peruvians
into Andoque territory and the initial enticing of Indigenous populations into rubber gathering through
the provision of manufactured goods, Fisi and Nestor’s account depicts the Casa Arana’s agents arriving
abruptly in Andoque land and forcibly compelling people to work for them. Despite Fisi’s assertion that
Dóñékɒi’s father taught him about the Speaking Tree and other important traditions that a captain should
master, it seems that Dóñékɒi belonged to a lesser lineage withing the Eagle Clan than Yinñéfɵkn,
whose father’s maloca received the goods. Fisi’s saying that “Dóñékɒi’s father gave Yobidi Kadanni,
Yinñéfɵkn’s father, the power to fight when they [Dóñékɒi and Yinñéfɵkn] were still children” may be
an acknowledgement of hierarchical difference between them. Dóñékɒi’s inferiority is also suggested by
Landaburu (1993, 150). According to the information provided to Estrada Añokazi by Andoque
members, Yinñéfɵkn ceded control to Dóñékɒi, and not vice versa, because he had been trained for a
medicinal specialization and did not like captaincy (2017, 199). In the testimony that Landaburu and
Pineda collected from Yinñéfɵkn, the eldest survivor of the genocide at that time, his father’s authority
is extensively described, but Padamnta, Dóñékɒi’s father, was not mentioned among the clan captains of
the period preceding the genocide. Yinñéfɵkn only mentioned that Dóñékɒi had become one of the two
captains when rubber extraction was already underway (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 237). As Fisi
recounts, Dóñékɒi only had a maloca after the end of Normand’s supervision, which appears to mark the
conclusion of the most devastating period for the Andoque people.
Dóñékɒi’s ascent to captaincy appears to be influenced by both his resourcefulness and flexibility
represented in bridging clan divisions and gathering surviving individuals from various clans, estimated
to be around 300 people (ibid, 239; Landaburu 1993, 150), and by his pragmatic approach to
collaboration with the Casa Arana’s overseers. Similar to other captains in the region, Dóñékɒi was
provided with weapons by the company agents to secure rubber extraction by his people. It is important
to consider these actions undertaken by Dóñékɒi (and other regional captains) as strategic measures
aimed at minimizing torture, suffering, and extermination inflicted by the company agents. This

137

involved providing the required amounts of rubber to settle inflated debts that were impossible for
Indigenous people to measure and to acquire much-needed manufactured goods and metal tools.
Although Fisi describes how Dóñékɒi received weapons from Normand, he particularly highlights the
former’s collaboration with Miguel Zumaeta. This collaboration eventually led to Zumaeta’s initiative to
relocate Dóñékɒi’s group to the safer Metá River, north of the Caquetá, where he would continue rubber
extraction with them independently of the Casa Arana, thus protecting them from the company’s
intended deportation to Peru. In Fisi and Nestor’s narrative, Zumaeta emerges as the savior of the
Andoque people, rescuing them from Normand’s sadistic treatment. Miguel Zumaeta belonged to a
family that was closely allied with Julio Arana: his sister Eleonora was Arana’s wife, his brother Pablo
was the company’s general manager, and his other brother Bartolomé was killed by a Bora man while
overseeing rubber extraction in the Putumayo (Casement 1997, 250). Nevertheless, and although Miguel
Zumaeta seems to have worked with Arana from an age as early seventeen (Guzmán Gonzalez 1971,
53), Fisi and Nestor describe him as a military commander who arrived to the region to capture
Normand following the order of his superiors. Contrary to their account, Normand was not arrested in
the Caquetá-Putumayo region by a military commander who brought him back to Peru and later returned
to produce rubber. After facing prosecution by Peruvian courts following Casement’s investigation,
Normand fled to various countries before being caught and extradited to Peru. He was then imprisoned
in 1913 and escaped prison in 1915 (Páramo Bonilla 2008, 80). My elder interlocutors acknowledged
that Miguel was also violent and would punish their parents if they brought insufficient rubber
quantities. The fact that he had taken multiple Indigenous spouses or concubines, including two
Andoque women, without necessarily seeking the consent of those women or their families, further
demonstrates how he preserved the sexually predatory patterns exhibited by previous rubber bosses.
However, his rule was perceived as less arbitrary and disproportionately violent compared to previous
overseers. Other interlocutors concur that under his command, Dóñékɒi and his people were allowed to
engage in horticultural practices for their own sustenance and hold ceremonial dances that promoted
crop abundance and social reproduction, whose felicitous organization increases a captain’s prestige.
The testimony of Duñékɒ (“Water Fluff”), a survivor from Yiñékɒ’s generation, as presented by Pineda

138

(2000, 198–201), illustrates the interconnected trajectories of Andoque individuals with Zumaeta’s
occasional travels to sell rubber and acquire goods on their behalf.33
It is difficult to determine the duration of Dóñékɒi leadership before the deportation of his group to Peru
in 1928, after Zumaeta’s superiors discovered his plan to secretly relocate the Andoque population to a
safe area on the Metá River, north to the Caquetá, for which he ordered the Andoque to prepare several
years earlier by clearing garden plots. It is also unclear whether Miguel Zumaeta assumed control
immediately after Normand’s flight, as Fisi recounts, or later. Guzmán, for instance, stated that he was
only sent by the Casa Arana to reorganize the Andoque’s work in 1925 (Guzmán Gonzalez 1971, 53). It
appears that Dóñékɒi was already captain by 1917, because, according to members’ accounts, he refused
the tobacco that Yarocamena shared with captains to invite them to join his revolt, which is dated to that
year (Pineda Camacho 2000, 163). In another conversation with Fisi and Nestor, they mentioned that the
only Andoque clans to join the revolt were the Ara, Opossum, and Toad Clans—the same clans
suspected of the unjust violence against the priests and nuns (see C1), which allegedly unleashed the
Peruvians’ extreme abuse and violence against the Andoque. While one reason for the refusal of most
Andoque people to support Yarocamena may be the earlier hostility between this Murui-Muina captain
and Andoque clans, it is also possible that another factor was the relatively lenient working conditions
under the agent overseeing the Andoque’s rubber work at that period. As Pineda argues for the region as
a whole, the limited Indigenous support for Yarocamena may be attributed, in part, to the relative
“unworsening” of work conditions in the years following Casement’s report and especially the global
decline in rubber prices during WWI (Pineda Camacho 2000, 160). Whether the Andoque’s overseer at
that time was Miguel Zumaeta who had already reached some understandings with Dóñékɒi or another
agent, Dóñékɒi’s lack of support for Yarocamena’s cause may have also contributed to his portrayal as a
pragmatic Indigenous leader in the eyes of the Casa Arana’s agents, including Zumaeta.
Dóñékɒi’s preference to work with Zumaeta (and possibly previous Casa Arana agents) was
accompanied by a more restrained approach to combat, as described by Fisi when he mentions that
Dóñékɒi “set aside his weapon to become a cacique and organize dances.” However, Dóñékɒi’s
disengagement from combat is also connected to his position as the leader of a group comprising

In his thesis, Levy Andoke adopts a more critical tone towards Zumaeta, stating that upon his return from captivity by the
Casa Arana to the Andoque territory, “he never provided any explanations to the rest of the people [the Andoque survivors]
about the [Andoque] people who had been captured alongside him. His response did not extend beyond stating that he did not
know what had happened to them. Nevertheless, the Andoque accepted him once again” (L. Andoke 2011, 61–62).

33

139

survivors from multiple previously internecine clans. This dual withdrawal from fighting, both with
other Indigenous clans and non-Indigenous agents, alongside a focus on work and exchange with the
latter, forms the political backdrop for the strengthening of the Egret mythology—or the political project
that this mythology aims to achieve. Therefore, this process, which Landaburu (1993) attributed to
Yiñékɒ, may predate this captain and have its roots at least in his father’s captaincy.
As Landaburu noted, the transition from the vertical animal mythology to the horizontal egret
mythology aligns with the political centrality of Yiñékɒ and the marginality of Yinñéfɵkn, who, in the
eyes of Landaburu’s interlocutors, embodied old clan identities and aggressive, cannibalistic tendencies.
This memory persists among Andoque members today, who widely agree that Yinñéfɵkn, as a young
person in the early twentieth century, participated in the cannibal dances held during that period.
Interestingly, Andoque members tend to exaggerate Yinñéfɵkn’s collaboration with the Casa Arana
agents. While he admitted in his testimony to catering for Indigenous prisoners (Landaburu and Pineda
1984, 238)—presumably following the Peruvians’ orders—several interlocutors described him as a
permanent guard at the company’s service, who later also held a similar position at the Araracuara Penal
Colony. However, this is doubtful since the colony was founded in 1938 when he would have been
almost 50 years old, according to my estimation. Some even claim that in both positions he consumed
the flesh of dead prisoners. In contrast to this unrestrained voracity, Dóñékɒi’s pragmatic, work-oriented
approach is evident in his preference, reported by his grandchildren Fisi and Irene, to utilize the captives
he received as laborers rather than consuming them. The memory of the two men thus exemplifies the
distinction between the cannibalistic and captaincy systems.
The deportation to Peru decimated Dóñékɒi’s group, with a reported 361 individuals being deported.
However, today there are very few Indigenous people in Peru who identify as Andoque, and the
Andoque language does not appear in the Peruvian register of spoken Indigenous languages (Chirif
2017, 228). Dóñékɒi himself never set foot on his homeland again, but Miguel Zumaeta did come back
in the 1930s to resume rubber work with the surviving Andoque, now under the leadership of Dóñékɒi’s
son, Yiñékɒ. As Guzmán pointed out, rubber, the resource that nearly annihilated them, became a
coveted source of income and economic stability that they did not want to abandon (Guzmán Gonzalez
1971, 76–77). The main river, along which persons are exchangeable with objects and hierarchy
between orphans and captains prevails, remained the primary spatial axis for the Andoque, rather than
the smaller rivers along which persons are exchanged for other persons. The history of Yiñékɒ’s group,

140

which we will now examine, also reveals a gradual movement toward the Caquetá River, where the
majority of Andoque population resides today.
The Orphans, Latent Eagle, and Multiplying Tree
Yiñékɒ’s evasion of capture when Dóñékɒi and most of his people were deported to Peru and his
subsequent initiation into Andoque traditions were pivotal in this people’s recuperation process. As I
will show in this section, Yiñékɒ’s eventual reworking of these traditions and emphasis on specific
dances were geared toward empowering the Andoque survivors and rehabilitating their agency by
reconnecting this center with the aggressive and fertilizing powers of the river source.
Reportedly a boy of ten to twelve years old when he lost his family, Yiñékɒ managed to escape with a
small group of individuals. Over the following years Yiñékɒ and other survivors found refuge in La
Palma, a location downstream on the Caquetá River near La Pedrera, where Miraña and Yucuna
communities also resided. During this time, the Andoque population experienced additional losses due
to epidemics that struck the region in the late 1920s and early 1930s, including diseases such as measles,
smallpox, and flu (Pineda Camacho 2000, 196–98), and which were attributed to the sorcery of
neighboring groups.
As Casement had already observed in 1910, elders had become a rare sight in the Caquetá-Putumayo,
especially among the Andoque, as Normand had killed all the elders who could not collect rubber and
who had been suspected of advising the younger generations against collecting rubber (Casement 1997,
250). As a result, the majority of survivors who gathered in La Palma or sought refuge in the forest
elsewhere were relatively young. Andoque members today tend to downplay the role of the surviving
elders, attributing to them a disparaging attitude towards Yiñékɒ and a discouraging stance toward the
recovery efforts in general.
In the years after the deportation of his father’s group, Yiñékɒ reportedly wandered among the Yucuna
and Tanimuca along the Mirití River, recovering his ancestral traditions through experimentation with
hallucinogenic plants and particularly by learning from an elder of the Oropendola clan, called Mnkoena
(meaning uncertain) (L. Andoke 2011, 48). Andoque members today express differing versions
concerning the extent of Mnkoena’s role in Yiñékɒ’s apprenticeship process, and the contrasting
versions held by Tañe and Fisi also reflect their own claims for knowledge and power. Tañe represents
an expansive version in which the wise old man, through his shamanic skills, realized that the Andoque

141

in La Palma were targeted by Bora and Miraña sorcerers, and came to their rescue, protecting these
young refugees who were unable to defend themselves. Mnkoena, who, according to Tañe, belonged to
the Miraña Oropendola clan, cured for the Andoque their ancestral territory after decades during which
it had been neglected and abused, and transmitted to Yiñékɒ knowledge that is rooted in the Miraña
traditions, bestowing upon him his spiritual power, or tne’túi. “This is what the late father-in-law told
me,” said Tañe, quoting Yiñékɒ in Andoque, “‘My uncle Mnkoena gave me his power, this is how I
have this knowledge (o yodɨ yatne’túi bɵñe nima ao dotañé). We are no longer orphans, the late
[Yiñékɒ] said, because we have this power with us.” When I inquired about the source of Yiñékɒ’s
power, Tañe clarified that it derived from the Miraña elder, not from Dóñékɒi. This version of
transmission, bypassing the direct father-to-son lineage, aligns with Tañe’s position as a man of Miraña
paternal descent, who bases his aspiration for leadership on the power and knowledge entrusted to him
by Yiñékɒ to prepare his son (and Yiñékɒ’s grandson) for captaincy (see Chapter 10).

Figure 8. Tañe Andoke Andoke toasting coca leaves (Photo taken by the author)

On the other hand, Fisi, whose claim to power is based on the transmission of knowledge and power
from father to son, portrays Mnkoena as a mere laborer at the maloca where he lived before the
genocide, responsible for coca pounding (un pilador). Fisi limits Mnkoena’s role to assisting Yiñékɒ in
reconnecting with his late father’s heritage. “Mnkoena offered my father coca, but he refused, saying
that coca is dirty (feo), that it’s an earthworm, because that was the story that he knew [M1], and told
him: if my father was still alive, I would ask him to give me a story with which I could mambeate
(mambear, consume coca powder),” said Fisi. “Then Mnkoena told him the story of the coca of the

142

orphans [M2], and my father started mambeating. If he hadn’t told him that, I wouldn’t have any
knowledge (no tendría idea), and my father wouldn’t have any knowledge, so that’s how he saved me.”
According to Fisi, Mnkoena recognized Yiñékɒ’s father as a great captain, guided the young orphan in
his leadership path, and directed his efforts towards recovering his clan traditions and the knowledge
possessed by Dóñékɒi.
Fisi’s reference to M2 is significant because in this myth the coca plant aids the orphans in overcoming
their separation from their father, Egret of the Center, referred to as Sḭ́ di at the end of the narrative, and
learn the teachings of this potent cannibal god from the river source despite his physical absence. More
particularly, Sḭ́ di’s thunder serves as a warning to his orphaned children, alerting them to an imminent
deluge of fiery water advancing from the east, i.e., the river mouth. This aligns with the arrival of Casa
Arana agents who penetrated Andoque territory by traversing the Cahuinarí and Igará-Paraná Rivers
upstream. The image of orphanhood holds a significant position in contemporary mambeadero discourse
and mythical narratives, whether portrayed as two orphan brothers in some myths or two brothers and
one sister in others. In what follows, I demonstrate how this image, as it appears in the flood myth
alluded to in M2, empowered the recovering Andoque group and facilitated its repositioning within the
cannibalistic cosmos.
This flood myth, M10, as narrated in Appendix 1, is referred to as “the Orphans’ Flood.” It is considered
a benign myth, contrary to the dangerous M9 recounting “the Eagle’s Flood.” In its present form, M10
incorporates the former myth as one of its episodes. In this story, two orphans trigger the flood by
chewing on the marrow of Nocturnal Curassow (Sábúdui; Nothocrax urumutum). The hot liquid pouring
out of the bone submerges the earth, right when the spread wings of the eagles dam the river (M9).
Alongside several animals, the orphans find refuge from the flood water on a growing tree, from the top
of which they see Hummingbird Egg (Pá̰di hádɨ) going downriver to steal from there an ember to lit new
fire for the surviving humanity instead of the one extinguished by the flood. This is the only Andoque
myth I have heard that involves episode sequences resembling those found in movies or TV series, with
cross-cutting. One moment, the orphans climb a tree and witness Hummingbird Egg going downriver to
steal fire. Then, we shift to another maloca to witness the stealing episode, followed by Hummingbird’s
return to the Center. Finally, we return to the orphans who perceive the imminent break of dawn and are
fed by their mother from above. The closest example I have for such cross-cutting in Andoque
mythology is M20 (see Appendix 1), where the scenes shift only once, between the adventures

143

undergone by the girl who goes under the earth and the ones undergone by her sister who reaches the
sky, and not twice, as in the flood myth.
The exceptional sequence of episodes in M10 provides evidence of the recent and somewhat disjointed
introduction of the theme of the orphans, which can plausibly be attributed to Yiñékɒ, who taught Fisi
the myth recorded in Appendix 1. In the version recounted to me by Raquel and transmitted to her by
Yinñéfɵkn, the two brothers are identified as Nénéfi, the elder, and Hummingbird Egg, the younger,
who encourages his elder to consume the boiling marrow of Nocturnal Curassow. In this version there is
only one cross-cutting instead of two, which follows a vertical logic, like in M20. As the water level
rises, Nénéfi is compelled to climb up to the sky on a seed that transforms into a tree, while
Hummingbird goes downriver to acquire a new fire, which Crestless Curassow then swallows and
defecates. This latter episode symmetrically mirrors Hummingbird Egg’s prior consumption in this
version of another hot element, namely, the marrow of Nocturnal Curassow, a bird resembling Crestless
Curassow physically but seen as its opposite because of its nocturnal singing habits, in contrast to the
crestless curassow’s morning singing (in Fisi’s version, the orphans are the ones who consume the
marrow). I assume that Yinñéfɵkn and Raquel’s version predates Fisi’s due to its more traditional
sequence of episodes and neater symmetrical structure. This version also bears greater resemblance to
Murui-Muina and Miraña narratives, where two brothers—Sun and Hummingbird in the Murui-Muina
variant, or two hummingbirds, according to the Miraña—cause a flood of boiling water by sucking the
hot marrow of a nocturnal curassow (Karadimas 2005, 315; Urbina Rangel 2010, 123–34; see also
García 2018, 222, n.60).34 The ascent described in Yinñéfɵkn and Raquel’s version, undertaken by
Nénéfi, the captain of eagles residing in the sky, also aligns with the other flood myth (M9), where the
flood separates the beings that inhabit the different vertical layers: Nénéfi’s creatures and extensions—
namely, the eagles—in the sky, Nénéfi’s people (the animals) beneath the earth, and human beings in
between on the earth’s surface.
It appears that Yiñékɒ (or possibly his father) replaced Nénéfi with the orphans and attributed to them
the action that originally belonged to Hummingbird Egg, and which triggers the flood (the
encouragement to suck the marrow). In line with Landaburu’s (1993) overall argument concerning
Yiñékɒ’s mythological reworking, I suggest that this substitution was aimed to remove specific clanIn another Miraña myth, which resembles M9 in that those living below the hero and hunted by him capture his son, the
hero is called Sun (Karadimas 2005b, 310–11). There are evident parallels between Sun and Nénéfi within Andoque
mythology as two predators living in the sky.
34

144

related elements from the narrative in order to make this much-needed myth about resilience more
relatable to members of other clans who have experienced significant losses in their own oral knowledge
and myth traditions. However, Landaburu’s interpretation of the centrality of the orphanhood theme in
the aftermath of the rubber genocide may be too restrictive. Based on another myth where they create
manguaré drums and a multiplying beam that outperform Pineapple’s (Tomirepa) ritual instruments,
Landaburu suggested that the orphans represent Dóñékɒi and Yiñékɒ, who were themselves bereft of
parents and belonged to a lesser lineage whose members had not held captaincy positions in the past,
and who managed to lead the group, instead of Yinñéfɵkn, who was born into a higher lineage (ibid,
153). However, myth heroes do not necessarily represent individuals with deliberate objectives, and as
ideologically powerful as they may be, we cannot assume that they were devised as mere tools for
promoting the leadership of specific historical figures. From a wider perspective, myth heroes can also
embody cosmic, social, or psychic forces that become subjects of reflection, fear, admiration, or hope
for the listeners, and the symbolic universe of mythology serves as a repository of elements for the
construction of both personal and collective identities.
In considering the theme of the orphans from this perspective, and in light of the previous discussion on
orphanhood as a lack of agency and predatory capacity, it becomes apparent that the orphans symbolize
the state in which the survivors found themselves in the 1930s. The orphanhood theme was central in the
discourse of other People of the Center (Pineda Camacho 2014, 108). These people were orphans not
only because they lacked parents, particularly fathers, or captains, but also because they had fallen prey
to the Casa Arana and now lacked the agency and predatory capacity typically embodied in such
knowledgeable elders and leaders, who would protect them from attacks by other groups or vengeful
nonhuman entities. The condition of deprivation, poverty, and hardship experienced by orphans also
provides an explanation for the disobedience of the orphans in M10 to the given orders and their
satisfaction of hunger through the consumption of the marrow. This action, which leads to the
catastrophic event, is performed or initiated in Raquel’s version and in the Murui-Muina narrative
(Urbina Rangel 2010, 124) by Hummingbird Egg, whose motives are voraciousness and mischief.
However, rather than being a permanent genealogical position or a marker of humble origin versus
captaincy, this orphanhood is a reversible status from which the orphan can emerge as a fully
empowered individual with greater agency. Therefore, the theme of the orphans should be viewed not
only as a strategic tool to advance a political project, but also in a broader transformative manner, as a

145

means to reconstitute the surviving Andoque as empowered agents endowed with a predatory capacity.
The act of placing the orphans on the growing tree instead of Nénéfi should not be interpreted solely as
an attempt to erase an element associated with the Eagle Clan from the myth. In fact, and although
Yiñékɒ’s version of the orphans’ flood myth became the widespread one, Nénéfi was not removed from
Andoque mythology, and his myths are still told in mambeaderos, even by Yiñékɒ’s sons. Instead, this
substitution can be understood as endowing the orphaned survivors with Nénéfi’s capacities and
elevating them to the position of this powerful eagle god, or at least to that of the members of the Eagle
Clan. It is a way to restore their center, reconstruct the space in which they exist by perceiving the river
source and the river mouth, and to receive the chili from the sky that would empower them, granting
them protection and the predatory abilities necessary to escape the position of prey and become fully
human again.35
The rehabilitation of predatory agency was also a key objective of the Multiplying Tree Dance (Tu’sí) in
post-genocide period. This dance was geared toward demographic growth by reestablishing links with
the aggressive and fertilizing river source. Fisi and other interlocutors told me that Dóñékɒi revived this
ceremonial dance, although Landaburu inferred from his data that it was not celebrated until Yiñékɒ’s
time (1993, 155). Both Fisi and Mario, his close ritual collaborator from the Deer Clan, recounted to me
that Sifa, a powerful sorcerer from Mario’s clan, played a crucial role in preserving the cherished
traditions associated with this dance and passing them down to Dóñékɒi. This recollection may serve as
a way for them to recall the historical relationship between their clans as one characterized by alliance
and mutual dependence, rather than warfare (ibid, 148, 158 n.9).
The Multiplying Tree Dance is also associated with the orphans and the flood myth. M11, in Appendix
1, as narrated to me by Fisi, recounts how the orphans, seeking to multiply humanity and crops again,
led the flood survivors to prepare a dance beam referred to as “Multiplying Anaconda” (Tu’sí Hɵpɵ) and
representing Red Anaconda (Pe’pai), one of the Creator’s sons, who had entrenched underneath the Site
of Tears, in the headwaters of several rivers in the Andoque territory (and hence, in the “river source”),
during the flood. To safeguard the beam and protect it from malevolent figures such as Green Tapir
(Pa’si Ḭtɵ), the people danced and sang:

In their account of Dóñékɒi and Yinñéfɵkn imprisonment and the former’s encouragement to the latter by promising food
from the sky in C1 (in Appendix), Fisi and Nestor make explicit the reference to M10.
35

146

This is our cooled down seat (kau’ɵikupa)
Good seat (hóñóɒ kupa)
We have come here happy (hóño).

On another occasion, Fisi and Nestor told me that the orphans first created a dancing beam from the açai
palm, which was formed from the anaconda’s entrails, calling it “multiplying açai” (pnta tu’sí) and
celebrating a dance so that human beings would become as numerous as the açai fruits. It was only later
that they decided to search for a harder beam that would embody Multiplying Anaconda itself, choosing
the ma̰kapa tree (see also Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 91–95).
This dance, to which we will return upon exploring the Andoque ritual system in Chapter 11, is
considered the seat (kupa) of all other dances. Since the illnesses and misfortunes in general, and the
genocide in particular, are perceived as forms of nonhuman predation over humans, the dance was
celebrated, as Irene explained to me, “to multiply people, so that nothing will become an animal.” It is
associated with patrilineal continuity and the dominance of agnation over exchanges with real and
potential affines. Consequently, it serves as the firm seat of the identity of those who partake in its
celebration. One of the songs sung during the dance expresses:
This is our seat that he tells us about.
The cooled-down seat (u’ɵikupa) that he tells us about.
To which we came happy (hóño).
And from it: Rise up (tánőyikakn)! Rise up! Rise up!
Rise up, you, to whom we have come.

The phallic multiplying beam symbolizes Red Anaconda. The descent of this powerful yet discrete
predator under the Site of Tears during the flood and its reemergence above ground can be interpreted as
representing fortitude and resilience, which gained heightened significance for the group of surviving
Andoque after the rubber holocaust. By dancing upon this beam, the ceremony reestablishes the
connection with the fertilizing forces of the river source. The multiplying beam is also associated with
the morning rainbow that appears in that direction, heralding an abundance of healthy crops to those
diligent enough to witness its early morning appearance, hail to it, shake the fruit trees and play the
manguaré. This rainbow also bestowed colors upon birds in mythic times. Consequently, the multiplying
beam is contrasted to the destructive afternoon rainbow that appears in the direction of the river mouth,
bringing illness and discomfort to those who do not seek shelter from the light rain that accompanies it.
In mythology, this rainbow, that bestowed color upon fish, is associated with different malevolent

147

figures, depending on the person discussing it, one of these figures being the transformed Green Tapir,
mentioned in M11 and discussed in Chapter 9.36 The demographic growth sought in this dance is thus
accompanied by defense from the dangerous forces of the river mouth. In addition, it is also
accompanied by an assertive stance toward other Indigenous adversaries, who are remembered for their
past infringements upon the Andoque. For instance, the following song mocks Pei, the Féénemɨna
captain and Dóñékɒi’s enemy (see C1, in Appendix 2):
He cares for her, he cares for her (yatúknḭ́ mḭ’i, literally: she entered his heart),
She’s here, I see that it’s her.
She’s here,
The daughter of late fellow (saámḭ) Pei.
The People of Eagle came with her.
They still haven’t eaten her (hɨo̰beɵ).

Or this song belittling Yarocamena’s revolt, referred to here through the translation of his name into
Andoque, Yó’őnnkndɨ (“Enemy Segment Tree”):
Who can it be who is causing a movement?
What can it be that he is telling me?
I believe it’s the son of fellow (saámḭ) Enemy Segment Tree.
With him the earth is moving.
What can it be that he is telling me?
Is it his hand?
Is it his foot?
It was Sun who created the shadow.
Oh my, oh my (hḛko, hḛko [expressing fear])
The kɒkɒ frogs came [when heard, they can be mistaken for a shadow, and equally frightening; they are the ones
moving the earth].

Other Multiplying Tree songs contain cannibal motifs (e.g., Chirif 2017, 243; de la Hoz Melo 2005, 85),
although this ceremony is not known to include an anthropophagic feast in the past. The multiplying
beam itself is perceived as “red,” fierce, and cannibalistic.37 A maloquero shared with me a story about a
renowned captain from a neighboring people who, a few years earlier, had participated in his

The other figure is Lady Peccary mentioned in M22; see Chapter 12. On the Amerindian perception of two rainbows and
the relation between the one appearing at later hours to epidemics see Lévi-Strauss 1964, 303.
37
Llaaríwa, the equivalent of the Multiplying Tree Dance among the Bora, is also described as a war dance, in which people
used to play the flutes made from the bones of dead enemies. See Lucas 2019, 338.
36

148

Multiplying Tree Dance with malicious intention, and died shortly afterwards. The Andoque maloquero
attributed that captain’s death to the anaconda spirit animating the multiplying beam, who sought to
protect the maloca to which it belongs. Such outward symbolic aggressiveness, rooted in the
cannibalistic system, thus appears to have played a significant role in empowering the survivor group
and facilitating the recovery of agency among its members.
The Making and Unmaking of Yiñékɒ’s Center
“Your father was the one who united us, here,” Yinñéfɵkn was recorded by Landaburu and Pineda as
saying to Fisi concerning Yiñékɒ, the latter’s father. “He gathered us in one place… We stayed in his
[maloca]. There was no one else to unite us… For sure, we seemed dead; when your father arrived here,
we immediately [went] with him, to one and only site, and then we became human again. We grew once
more, but [before that] we were nothing” (1984, 242). Further ahead, Yinñéfɵkn is quoted explaining
this: “One, by himself, is like a dead man. It is when several [people] reunite with a captain that they
start to become human once again” (ibid, 243 n.27). This section examines how Yiñékɒ established an
Andoque center between the 1930s and 1950s, positioned himself at its core, and enlisted other
survivors as workers to his vision. It also outlines dynamics that led to the dissolution of this united
center in the following decades. While the historical narratives in this section may initially appear overly
detailed, it is important to bear in mind their significance. In a small group like the Andoque survivors,
specific marriages, tensions, and seemingly minor events can have considerable consequences. Some of
the occurrences discussed here play a pivotal role in understanding the current power dynamics explored
in the subsequent chapters.
During their stay in La Palma, Yiñékɒ lived with different Bora and Miraña women and had children
with one of them. After separating from his last non-Andoque wife and uniting with Pa̰’fó of the
Tanager Clan, he became the captain of the group of Andoque survivors, which included 12 men
(including himself) and 14 women, leading them to resettle their territory. Since Pa̰’fó herself did not
later occupy any ritual positions in the future malocas and ceremonial life as expected of a maloquero’s
wife—Teresa would prepare the feminine ritual offerings and train Yiñékɒ’s daughter Irene to assume
this position during the latter’s teen years—it is tempting to consider that the relatively large number of
kin that she and her mother possessed played an important role in Yiñékɒ’s decision to marry her, or
placed him in an advantageous position to lead the group once they united. Table 14 in Appendix 3
provides a detailed list of the members of the small survivor group, followed by explanations on how the

149

matrimonial union with Pa̰’fó gave Yiñékɒ access to eleven individuals whom he could recruit for work
out of a group of twenty-five people. Pa̰’fó was also a classificatory cousin of Yiñékɒ from the side of
her mother Mɵɒ, and although my interlocutors were unable to trace with precision the genealogical
links between them or determine their degree of relatedness, they agreed that their union would
otherwise be considered incestuous. Similar to other People of the Center, the Andoque maintain a semicomplex alliance structure, wherein marriage with real or classificatory bilateral cousins is considered
incestuous and spouses are ideally sought among third or even four-degree cousins (Gasché 1976;
Karadimas 2000; Londoño Sulkin 2012, 160–67; Lucas 2019, 148–66). Despite the small size of the
survivor group, this matrimony was the only one between cousins to which my interlocutors could
identify. It thus seems that Yiñékɒ married Pa̰’fó as part of a deliberate plan (in which his mother-in-law
may have also been involved) to position himself at the center of the Andoque survivor group and thus
gain six young men as brothers-in-law, whom he could attract to collaborate with him in building the
maloca on the ancestral territory.38 In the conceptual framework employed throughout this thesis, we
may say that by marrying Pa̰’fó, Yiñékɒ effectively preyed upon her network of kin and familiarized
them by aligning their agency to his own.
The small Andoque group’s return to their ancestral territory in the mid-1930s coincided with their
resumption of rubber gathering under Miguel Zumaeta. Zumaeta took two Andoque wives (among
multiple other wives), including Ines (7 in Table 14) as well as non-community member from the Tree
Clan and a classificatory granddaughter of (14). While Zumaeta lived on the Caquetá River in the
settlement built in front of the Araracuara Penal Colony, which would later be called Puerto Santander,
Yiñékɒ’s group settled near Armadillo River (Feikɵsé), relatively remote from the Caquetá. Yiñékɒ
built five malocas in total, one near Armadillo River, and the others on different points along Macaw
River. The location of these later malocas, closer to the Caquetá River, indicates the Andoque’s
increasing reliance on trade with settlers and the growing significance of selling the large fish from the
Caquetá to merchants starting from the 1970s.
Yiñékɒ organized his people for work with Zumaeta and it was to his malocas that the fruits of their
labor arrived—the goods that Zumaeta bought for them and distributed between the men based on the
amounts of rubber that they had gathered (although rubber tapping often involved the joint work of
This preference for a consequential marriage despite the genealogical proximity reflects the “endogamic ideology”
identified by Landaburu (1993, 155–56) and Pineda (1979, 52–53) in M23 (see Chapter 9), where the hero’s union with the
sister promises greater stability and protection against external hostilities than his previous union with a foreign woman.
38

150

husbands and wives, the latter were not compensated directly like the men). While Yiñékɒ himself did
not handle the distribution of goods, and although the value of the goods they received was significantly
lower than that of the rubber they turned over to Zumaeta, accommodating the fruits of their work was
crucial for portraying him as a capable leader who could negotiate with the Whites and secure benefits
for his people after decades of more deadly exchange. Today’s elders still remember the festive
occasions when the group members would gather at the maloca to receive goods. Rubber tapping
increasingly focused on the northern bank of the Caquetá River, particularly in the areas surrounding the
Yarí, Mesai, and Amú Rivers, an area that did not fall within the ancestral territory of any Andoque clan,
but whose trees had not suffered excessive tapping during the Casa Arana period. Mnkoena, although
not physically joining the group in resettling the territory, is believed to have spiritually “healed” that
area, providing Andoque names to its locations and owner-persons to ensure the safety of the group’s
work there, and teaching Yiñékɒ these names and the methods of negotiation with these owner-persons.
Zumaeta and Yiñékɒ reached understandings concerning the division of time between periods for rubber
gathering, called fábricos, and periods dedicated to subsistence economic activities such as felling forest
plots and tending to gardens in the dry season, and to the celebration of the main ceremonial dances
during the rainy season (By the 1960s and 1970s the two fábricos took place between late February and
May and between August and December [Guzmán Gonzalez 1971, 103; Pineda Camacho 1979, 34]).
Since the earlier genocide was attributed to the wrath of the territorial owner-persons due to the
Andoque’s excessive rubber extraction, Yiñékɒ, during this later period of rubber tapping, implemented
specific ritual measures to protect his group from such catastrophes, as will be discussed in Chapter 13.
Not long after their settlement in Armadillo River, Pedro encountered Yinñéfɵkn and his daughter
Teresa (Sédieikn, “Clarified Water”), who had not fled to La Palma, during a rubber excursion in the
forest.39 He brought them back with him, and took Teresa as a wife, before she would later become
Umberto’s (18 in Table 14) wife. As mentioned earlier, Yinñéfɵkn’s family seemed to hold a higher
status than Yiñékɒ’s, but Yinñéfɵkn himself did not build his own maloca, possibly due to his age and
perhaps because he could not gather enough people, given that Yiñékɒ had already established himself
as the core and center of the group. Yiñékɒ, who was Yinñéfɵkn’s classificatory nephew, utilized the
training provided by Yinñéfɵkn to his daughter Teresa. He enlisted Teresa, his classificatory cousin, as
his assistant in the preparation of feminine ritual offerings for dances, while his classificatory brother-inYinñéfɵkn had two other daughters who died without marrying and having children, but my interlocutors are undecided as
to whether they died before or after they joined the group.
39

151

law Umberto became responsible for the preparation of masculine ritual offerings (the “secrets,”
secretos; the person in charge of preparing them is referred to as secretario/secretaria). Yinñéfɵkn is
remembered by the elders today as a supporter as well as rival of Yiñékɒ, and their relationship
exemplifies the tension between captaincy and healing specializations and the distinction between red
and white ritual specializations, which will be discussed in Chapter 11. Yinñéfɵkn healed women and
children from illnesses associated with malevolent animals, assisted Yiñékɒ in selecting Indigenous
names for children, organized ambivalent dances such as River Turtle-Bamboo at Yiñékɒ’s maloca, and
taught some of my interlocutors certain myths and healing spells that Yiñékɒ considered inappropriate
for him as a captain. Some people attribute Yiñékɒ’s death to a creeping sorcery attack authored by
Yinñéfɵkn decades earlier, and say that by taking Teresa as his worker, Yiñékɒ saved her from the
deadly fate reserved to the children of sorcerers.
During another rubber excursion that I assume to have taken place in the early 1940s, the members of
Yiñékɒ’s encountered and added to their group a family from the Hɵí Kádánni (“Owl Eagle”) lineage of
the Eagle Clan. This family had previously lived with them in La Palma and included Pakn’dadiei
(“Sinking in Water”), his wife Mo̰da (“Plucking [a Cacique Bird]”), and three sons, the eldest of which,
Joselito (Sn’diei, “Hard Water”), having taken his stepmother from his father while in the forest and
assumed the role of family head. Joselito used to refer to Yiñékɒ as “my elder brother” (ohaɩ́ɵsí,
literally, “the essence for me”) both on account of his younger age and his acknowledgement of
Yiñékɒ’s claim that his own lineage, Ñedánńéi/ Ñḛmḭ Kádánni (“Starch Eagle,” or Harpy Eagle),
represents the true essence of the Eagle Clan, because it is the direct descendant of the harpy eagle
formed in mythology from the starch balls made by Nénéfi’s wife (M9), while Joselito’s lineage is of
secondary Eagle order. Like Yinñéfɵkn, Joselito also assumed the role of healer without challenging
Yiñékɒ’s captaincy.
Another person incorporated into the group in an asymmetrical fashion was Pedro, who was the only
non-Andoque man in the group’s early period. As will be discussed in Chapter 10, the Andoque have
welcomed other Indigenous people into their group on the condition that they were women or families
with marriageable daughters. However, Pedro’s case was distinct as he had Miraña origins, though
differing accounts exist regarding whether his Miraña identity stemmed from his mother or father’s side,
a distinction that holds implications for one’s identity in a predominantly patrilineal society. According
to Pedro’s children and grandchildren, who belong to the Sun Clan, Pedro’s father was an Andoque man

152

from the Sun Clan who had a Miraña wife, similar to his ancestors who had intermarried with the
Miraña for several generations. However, the members of the Eagle and Deer clans, including Irene,
Yiñékɒ’s daughter who married Tañe, Pedro’s son, offer an alternative version. They explain that
Pedro’s father was Miraña of the Paca Clan who disguised himself as a member of the Miraña Sun Clan
during the Casa Arana period to evade retaliation from the Peruvian rubber bosses for hostilities
committed by his original clan. Pedro’s father was a Miraña man married to Paikn (“Tanager Kept in the
Hand”), an Andoque woman of the Tanager Clan and Mɵɒ’s sister (according to Irene, she was Mɵɒ’s
cousin). Mɵɒ adopted Pedro and cared for him after his father had died. His children from the union
with Teresa, as well as his first son from his union with Ines, were named after their mothers’ clans
(Eagle and Anaconda Clans, respectively). This naming convention is typically followed when the father
is non-Indigenous or does not actively participate in raising the child with the mother. However, when
Yiñékɒ decided to give a name to Pedro’s second son, Tañe (“Stationary Sun”), at an Armadillo Dance,
he invented a new clan that had never previously existed within the Andoque system—the Sun Clan.
Yiñékɒ took charge of selecting names for Pedro’s children and grandchildren, and even Tañe
acknowledges that it was his father-in-law, rather than his biological father, who provided significant
teachings about his clan, including its origin story about the Sun and Moon. Supporting the accounts of
the Eagle and Deer clans, Pedro’s great-granddaughter is named Paikn, like his presumed Tanager
mother. However, this name now bears a new meaning befitting the Sun Clan—“Nascent Moon.” It is
worth noting that although Pedro’s grandson Levy initially provided me with his clan’s version
involving Miraña descent through the maternal line and Andoque descent through the paternal line, his
undergraduate thesis stated the opposite (L. Andoke 2011, 73).
According to Fisi, Pedro expressed a desire to maintain a Paca identity, but Yiñékɒ advised him that the
affiliation to the sun would provide better protection to his family, emphasizing that “The sun is the only
one that never dies.” By selecting names for Pedro’s children, as well as teaching them their clan origin
myth and training the eldest two for ritual roles (Delio and Tañe), Yiñékɒ exerted a significant influence
on their clan’s formation, surpassing his involvement in the affairs of other families. The rationale
behind bestowing a Sun identity upon Pedro’s family appears to be the creation of a manageable alterity,
which should be understood within the interplay of predation and familiarization, where each party
involved seeks to ensure the direction of domination by the agency of the other. By establishing Pedro’s
children as a distinct Andoque clan, they would become eligible for marriage and contribute to the
group’s demographic growth project. Simultaneously, their association with a central Andoque myth
153

through their names would align them with the thinking of members of other clans, inhibiting the
imposition of foreign Miraña perspectives on their future spouses and children. However, as will be
discussed in Chapter 10, Pedro’s non-Andoque origin and fewer kinship ties to other group members
paradoxically positioned his sons at the core of the Andoque kinship system, granting them more access
to political power.
The Andoque person with whom Yiñékɒ maintained the most balanced relationship appears to be To̰fi
of the Deer Clan, who was regarded as Yiñékɒ’s classificatory uncle. Their relationship was
characterized by a ceremonial exchange, highlighted by the reciprocal invitation to participate in ritual
dances. Over the years, To̰fi constructed three malocas at a distance from Yiñékɒ’s malocas to ensure
autonomy for each one of them, with the group members divided between the two malocas. To̰fi was
supported by Alejandro (numbered 9 in Table 14, Appendix 3) and Duñékɒ (13) as his secretarios and
workers. Alejandro was To̰fi’s distant cousin and Duñékɒ was his wife’s distant cousin, and thus his
brother-in-law, although my interlocutors could not specify the geneological links between the two and
To̰fi and his wife (and which may not have been too close, as Duñékɒ’s daughter would later marry
To̰fi’s son). To̰fi was later also greatly assisted by his two sons-in-law, who fulfilled substantial bride
service periods alongside him. While To̰fi’s children, Mario and Raquel, emphasize that their father was
Yiñékɒ’s equal, Yiñékɒ’s children tend to describe To̰fi as his subordinate, learning ritual skills and
knowledge from their father. Interestingly, although To̰fi named his daughter and grandchildren, Yiñékɒ
bestowed a name on To̰fi’s eldest son, Mario. Paradoxically, that name giving in the River TurtleCarrier Band Dance associated with primogeniture and leadership (Chapter 11) at To̰fi’s first small
maloca, also marked the moment when Yiñékɒ recognized To̰fi as his peer and the leader of a distinct
clan center. This recognition came after a period in which To̰fi had organized dances with Yinñéfɵkn,
who initiated him into captaincy. Despite To̰fi’s independence of Yiñékɒ, it was Yiñékɒ and not To̰fi
who later trained Mario for captaincy and ritual organization. Nevertheless, this may owe in part to
To̰fi’s premature death around 1970, when Mario was still very young.
Yiñékɒ “created” many of the children of the group by bestowing names upon them at ceremonial
dances. With the exception of Fisi, Yiñékɒ’s son, and Juan, the son of Rosa “China” and César (20 and 4
in Table 14), who did not receive ceremonial names due to the absence of a maloca during the early
years in Armadillo River, Yiñékɒ gave names to seven children, who were the firstborns of his men’s
unions, in the Armadillo Dance, also referred to as “Baptism Dance,” which serve to protect children by

154

granting them a name. In subsequent years, Yiñékɒ started giving names in more central dances. In
addition to Mario, To̰fi’s son, he named his two children Irene and Rodolfo at the Fausiya Dance.
Among the members of the following generation, born from 1965 onwards, and alongside several lesser
ceremonial name givings, Yiñékɒ aimed to cultivate future leadership within the Andoque group by
giving names in the River Turtle-Carrier Band Dance to the firstborn sons of four new fathers, including
his own grandson Hernando, To̰fi’s grandson, and two of Pedro’s grandchildren. People today explain
that through these ceremonies, Yiñékɒ instilled in them the disposition to acquire knowledge and power
similar to his own in adulthood. By contrast, Yinñéfɵkn bestowed a name upon only three persons, who
were his own son and two of the female descendants of To̰fi, who was regarded as his apprentice during
the latter’s youth, while To̰fi himself gave names to only three persons as well—his younger daughter
and the two grandchildren born to his elder daughter with a Féénemɨna man. Out of a total of 36 naming
rituals since the Andoque’s regrouping (see Table 15, Appendix 4), an impressive 18 were conducted by
Yiñékɒ. This number is even greater if we count the 19 individuals who were given as adults a name or
had their old name changed by Yiñékɒ in one Fausíya dance in the 1960s (see Table 16, Appendix 4)—a
collective name giving that has not since been paralleled by any other maloquero. While such name
giving to adults (a term also encompassing children past the first few years of their life) does not carry
prestige and is not considered to involve a transmission of powers equaling name giving to children, we
may view it as a diluted form of a name giver’s participation in the formation or transformation of the
name recipient’s subjectivity.
Yiñékɒ went beyond name giving and provided training to several sons and daughters within his group,
who are the group’s elders at present, in leadership and ceremonial roles: his sons Fisi, Rodolfo, and
Ignacio; Mario, To̰fi’s son; Juan, the eldest son of his brother-in-law César; and Delio and Tañe, Pedro’s
sons. Among the women, he trained his daughter Irene and Raquel, To̰fi’s daughter. While Rodolfo and
Ignacio were trained for the White ritual specialization, which focuses on exchange with human and
nonhuman real and potential affines, the other men were initiated into the Red specialization, which
centers on agnatic identity. Presently, as explored in Chapter 10, these individuals and other observers
offer varying perspectives of these trainings. Some people say that Yiñékɒ granted each person a unique
yet equally valid body of knowledge to prevent power struggles among them, while others assert that
Yiñékɒ entrusted some of them with the true versions of myth and procedures while excluding others, or
that he withdrew his spiritual support from specific individuals after they disappointed him.

155

People explain that Yiñékɒ wished to prepare these individuals to assume the leadership of their
respective clans in the future, recognizing that as the group expanded, relying on a single captain would
no longer be feasible, and clan affiliations would regain significance; in other words, there would no
longer be one Andoque center, but several clan centers. While this dissolution was influenced by the
gradual demographic growth of the Andoque, I identify three specific historical moments during the late
1950s and early 1960s that accelerated this process. These moments undermined the foundations of
Yiñékɒ’s authority, which relied on the control over work and exchange with Whites, his claim for
superiority within the Eagle Clan, and his ability to compel others to align with his vision. I discuss
these moments here in relative detail because they elucidate the power and authority previously exerted
by Yiñékɒ, and because they shaped the current divisions and dynamics between centers that will be
explored in the following chapters.
The first moment, as identified by Guzmán (1971, 110–11), involves the increased control by the rubber
boss over the Andoque’s labor. After Miguel Zumaeta’s death in 1952, his son Ernesto took over the
management of the rubber business until his own demise in 1956, when his brother Lisardo assumed
responsibility. In 1958, Lisardo was joined by his brother Alberto, and they divided the rubber business
between themselves—Lisardo working with the Féénemɨna, and Alberto with the Andoque (ibid 1971,
55–56). In 1959 Alberto and his Andoque workers found a group of Murui refugees near the Amú River,
consisting mostly of members of a single extended family who had been hiding in the forest since the
Casa Arana persecutions. Alberto recruited them for rubber work, and together with Yiñékɒ, arranged
the redistribution of the group’s women, who had previously married their relatives due to a lack of
available men, among single Andoque men. According to Guzmán, when the Murui captain died a year
or two later, Yiñékɒ was accused of sorcery, and Alberto significantly reduced his collaboration with
him in order to gain the trust of his new Murui workers (ibid, 110–11). Additionally, my interlocutors
recall that in that period Alberto ceased to distribute goods at Yiñékɒ’s maloca, thereby eliminating this
important symbolic element that had signified the captain’s role as the provider of abundance. Unlike his
father, who had resided on the Caquetá River at a distance from his workers, Alberto chose to live closer
to the Andoque, near Weed River (Pá̰ñe̋mnḭsé, often called “Rice River”). Instead of distributing goods
at Yiñékɒ’s maloca, Alberto started distributing them at his house, further deepening the Andoque’s
perceived disconnect between their captain and rubber work. Additionally, after only a few fábricos
under Alberto’s management, and no doubt also due to their advanced age, Yiñékɒ and most of his
contemporaries retired from rubber tapping, leaving the work to be carried out by their children. This
156

retirement created or exacerbated a generational division within the group, where, for the first time since
regrouping, those responsible for ceremonial dances and other ritual traditions were not the same
individuals who were involved in work and exchange with Whites. From oral accounts, it appears that
youth viewed knowledge and teachings of the elders as irrelevant to their own daily concerns, while the
elders felt neglected by their children. In a personal communication (October 2022), Jon Landaburu,
who began working with the Andoque in 1969 when that working arrangement was still in place, shared
that during fábricos, while the young men and their wives were in rubber camps on the north bank of the
Caquetá River, the elders at the main settlements and the linguist working with them experienced
hunger.
The second historical moment marking the dissolution of the center formed by Yiñékɒ was Joselito’s
rupture with Yiñékɒ in 1960, following the death of his son, Agustín, from a snake bite during one of
the first fábricos with Alberto. According to Agustín’s brother Germán, Joselito simply did not want to
live anymore around Yiñékɒ’s maloca because revisiting the place where his late son had lived was too
painful for him, and he decided to settle by the Caquetá River. While this sentiment is often cited as the
reason for the relocation of families after the death of their loved ones, other interlocutors attributed it to
Joselito’s resentment toward Yiñékɒ for not actively attempting to heal his son from an incident that is
not considered fatal if an apt and willing healer is within reach. Interlocutors from the Sun, Eagle, and
Deer clans relayed to me the explanation provided by Yiñékɒ and the elders supporting him after the
incident. According to that explanation, Agustín was not Joselito’s biological son but the son of a
member of the Carijona people, according to some, or of the Yucuna, according to others, who had
given him a perfume (chondu) several years earlier during Agustín’s visit. The perfume was allegedly
meant to conquer women but was actually devised by the Carijona/Yucuna father to kill his son in
revenge for his preference to live with Joselito. The perfume drove Agustín to madness to such an extent
that during rubber work in the forest he would incessantly fantasize about women, boast about his sexual
exploits, and let himself be seduced by dolphins who appeared to him in the form of women (see
Chapter 9). This made him susceptible to incidents such as snake bites, from which he could not be
cured. Yiñékɒ tried to heal him, but upon sucking the bite, he immediately sensed the traces of harmful
perfume, which could have utterly destroyed such a powerful person, and distanced himself from the
patient, as even the sight of a person affected by such a perfume could endanger him. According to one
interlocutor, Joselito was angry at “his older brother” for giving up on his son and for developing a
version of the events where Agustín was partly responsible for being bitten and, as such, incurable.
157

From Yiñékɒ’s friend, Joselito became his foe. Given the explanations provided to me on other
occasions about the importance of ceremonial dances and ritual procedures carried out by the captain for
safety during rubber tapping and other economic activities, I also assume that Joselito may have become
critical of Yiñékɒ’s capacity to negotiate with nonhuman entities to ensure the safety of his men. Instead
of gathering rubber with the rest of the youth, Joselito’s brothers and sons started working as guards at
the Araracuara Penal Colony and pioneered in harvesting fish from the Caquetá in large quantities for
sale. This deviation from the collective economic activity and the involvement in the extraction of faunal
resources instead of vegetal ones was severely censured by Yiñékɒ and the elders supporting him, who
assumed that Joselito was engaging in dangerous negotiations with owner-persons for success in fishing
and warned their sons not to follow his example. The premature deaths of Joselito, his brothers and most
of his sons are today regarded as the outcome of revenge by these owner-persons for their excessive
fishing. The break with Yiñékɒ’s captaincy reached a climax in Joselito’s creation of a competing
maloca in 1974, which he inaugurated with the River Turtle-Carrier Band Dance associated with
leadership and primogeniture (See Chapter 11), thereby signaling that he is no longer Yiñékɒ’s “younger
brother.” The tension between Joselito’s and Fisi’s descendants persists. Germán is today the declared
captain of the Eagle Clan because he would not accept Fisi’s double authority as both clan captain and
general cacique, but Yiñékɒ’s descendants rarely consult him or respect his authority. They and the
descendants of Yiñékɒ’s supporters still belittle both Joselito’s old maloca, and his nephew Heriberto’s
current maloca.
The third historical moment marking the dissolution of the center formed by Yiñékɒ was Umberto’s
decision to stop collaborating with him as his secretario in the end of 1960s and early 1970s. According
to several interlocutors, Umberto, who was a dedicated worker, became upset when Yiñékɒ’s new sonin-law, Tañe, did not comply with the custom of bride-service and did not participate in the maloca’s
ceremonial work. When Yiñékɒ relocated from Armadillo River to Macaw River, Pedro’s family,
oriented toward exchange and intermarriage with Whites, moved to the Macaw River mouth. Unlike
Irene’s first husband, a Murui-Muina man who lived at the maloca and is often mentioned as an example
of a hardworking, respectful son-in-law, Tañe did not relocate to his father-in-law’s maloca after uniting
with Irene—a union affected despite her parents’ objections—and it was rather Irene who immediately
moved to his father’s settlement. During that period, Tañe focused on rubber work and nurturing
alliances with his brother-in-law Alberto Zumaeta, and did not collaborate with Yiñékɒ in ceremonial
activities until the birth of his second son in 1973. Although my interlocutors did not explicitly share this
158

interpretation with me, I surmise that Yiñékɒ’s failure to impose temporary uxorilocality and bride
service on his son-in-law was taken by Umberto and other elders as a sign of his diminishing power and
a factor in diminishing his authority. If he could not align the agency of his son-in-law to his own, how
could he lead and coordinate work with the wider group? If he could not incorporate his son-in-law into
his maloca for a period generally respected by custom and instead lost his daughter immediately to her
husband, how could he protect group members from other modes of incorporation by affines, such as
illnesses? Umberto was replaced by Mario, but some interlocutors attribute Yiñékɒ’s diseases to the
Mario’s lesser skills, compared with Umberto, in preparing ceremonial offerings. Umberto’s
descendants have remained somewhat aloof from the group’s dances, preferring to learn ceremonial
songs from Joselito rather than resuming their father’s collaboration with Yiñékɒ and his successors.
Along with his sons, Umberto left Yiñékɒ’s settlement after his wife’s death around 1975, as he could
no longer bear seeing the places where she had lived and worked. The relocation of other families away
from Yiñékɒ’s malocas in the 1970s and 1980s is often attributed to similar grief over relatives.
Part I began with a discussion of the concept of “center” and an exploration of the two cosmo-economic
systems present among the Andoque to understand the meaning of the concept within each system. The
discussion revealed distinct notions of power associated with the center in each system. On one hand,
the heterosubstitutive-captaincy system emphasizes the economic power symbolized by the axe and its
metaphors, representing the ability to exert influence over others and the hierarchical process of
exchanging persons for an axe. On the other hand, the homosubstitutive-cannibalistic system emphasizes
the attainment of full development by the body which conveys notions of danger, wisdom, and authority,
and speech as the suspension of exchange within this system. The historical account of the Andoque’s
recuperation process demonstrated how a center was formed in a specific historical context and how its
members positioned themselves within these two cosmo-economic systems: as a captain and his
subordinates trading with Whites in the captaincy system, and as orphans striving for reproduction by
regaining their predatory agency in the cannibalistic one. It also discussed three historical moments
marking the dissolution of this center, which can be mapped onto the two systems: the captain’s
diminishing role as a trader and work coordinator, and growing doubts over his predatory position vis-àvis human sons-in-law and nonhuman agents seeking to harm his men (such as Agustín’s snake). In Part
III, we will delve into the conception and functioning of power within a cosmos characterized by
multiple centers, both nonhuman and human ones, including such clan centers as those that reappeared
during this dissolution. However, before delving into that discussion, Part II will examine the
159

importance of the river source and the appropriation of its powers in center formation, powers we have
touched upon throughout this chapter, especially through the references to the Multiplying Tree Dance
and the invocation of the deity Sḭ́ di.

160

Part II
Appropriating Power from the River Source

161

162

Introduction
As I mentioned in the previous part, the cultivars and knowledge that Egret of the River Source brings to
the center are treated as constitutive elements of the identity, power, and authority of those living at the
center. I this part, I explore the four main items brought by this egret figure: the maloca and its
instruments, manioc, tobacco, and coca. I focus on the capabilities with which they endow the people
living at the center for participating in beneficial asymmetrical exchanges with human and nonhuman
beings, and the spiritual power, tne’túi, to which they, and particularly coca and tobacco, give access,
and which my male interlocutors often cited as the translation, in the Andoque language, of the Spanish
word poder (power).
The maloca and three cultivars have been widely discussed by ethnographers of the People of the Center
and the Tukanoan speaking groups of Northwest Amazonia. These scholars have compared the different
ways in which these peoples construct their malocas and process substances from these cultivars, and
how they consume them and perceive their origins and effects, suggesting models for how the cultivars
and the substances elaborated from them form a whole in each cultural complex (e.g., Echeverri and
Pereira 2005; Echeverri 2015; Gutierrez 2020; C. Hugh-Jones 1979, 169–234; S. Hugh-Jones 2014).
The association made by the Andoque between the maloca and the three cultivars, on the one hand, and
the river source, on the other, directs me, in this part, to examine these elements as part of this
dissertation’s spatial theory of power. Here, the center acquires access to the forces held by the river
source and contained in these elements through the familiarization of these elements and the spiritual
entities mastering them. The forces of the river source are associated with its position within the two
cosmo-economic systems explored in the previous part: the captaincy and cannibalistic ones. Likewise,
the elements explored in this part both endow their users with predatory agency and serve them in
exchanges with affinal others, including those associated with the river mouth.
The capabilities granted by the three substances (as well as the ceremonial dances held at the maloca, as
we will see in Chapter 11) enable their producers and consumers the capacity to subjectivate human and
nonhuman others: to shape and transform their subjectivities, or to extend their own subjectivities to that
of the patient (Santos Granero 2009a). Within the Amazonian landscape, this Foucauldian concept of
power takes the form of familiarization: the transition from real or potential affinity to consanguinity
(Fausto 1999, 939). Familiarization is also the means through which these elements and the capabilities
that they possess become part of people’s arsenal, representing an important moment in the formation of

163

a relationship of mastery with these elements and their owner-persons. The owner-persons of the items
discussed in this part are the deities and mythical figures who were the first ones to create them, or the
animals or persons that these items were in mythical times before they transformed into what they are
today, and who continue to represent these items’ agentive aspect. It is the familiarization of these items’
owner-persons that gives Andoque members access to the capabilities and potentialities that they hold.
Two common means to familiarize others, as explored in the literature, are feeding them, thereby
fabricating the pet’s body as consubstantial with the master’s (Fausto and Costa 2013), and addressing
affinal relatives through kinship terms reserved for consanguineal ones (e.g., Taylor 1983). In this part, I
describe another form of familiarization through the narration of myth. This form is especially visible in
myths on the origin of tobacco and coca. Through comparison with myths of neighboring peoples, we
can detect in these myths a transition from control over these plants by a feminine figure associated with
the affinal world, into control over these plants by a masculine figure or consubstantiality with an
agnatic relative’s body. A similar pattern is seen with manioc: in one myth, it is appropriated from
women, while in another, it is shaped to align with male expectations. As we have seen in previous
chapters, this literary technique also appears in relation to Egret of the River Source, whom the narrative
familiarizes in M3, at the end of which he calls himself Egret of the Center. Therefore, it is not
surprising that tobacco and coca, brought to the center by Egret of the River Source in that myth, go
through a similar transformation in other myths as well. In other words, both the river source as a totality
and the different elements imported from there are familiarized to align their agency with those of the
people living at the center. Given the Andoque’s emphasis on patrilineal clan identities, I also refer to
this process as “agnatization” to highlight the attempts to subsume affinal exchanges within the project
of agnatic continuity and reproduction.
However, as Costa and Fausto have shown, the direction of Amazonian mastery relations is invertible,
as the familiarized pet can become a familiarizing master who dominates its previous master (Costa and
Fausto 2019, 206). This explains the dangers arising from maloca elements which are not “fed” properly
or from the substances whose consumption is accompanied with the narration of the “wrong” stories. It
also accounts for the delicate interplay between river source and center in Andoque cosmology: in M3,
Egret of the River Source achieves power by mastering the beings living at the center: the anacondas,
whom he turns into beams, and his father-in-law, whom he provides with coca and tobacco. However, at
the end of the myth, as noted above, he is familiarized by the same center that he has previously

164

familiarized. The invertibility of mastery relations is thus also the very mechanism that allows the center
to incorporate powers from the river source.
Finally, these authors emphasize that although familiarization can manifest through propitious actions
like feeding, these actions ultimately conform to the predatory framework of the self’s appropriation of
alterity. Similarly, the subsequent chapters demonstrate that while familiarization through the substances
may operate within a gift logic, these substances ultimately refer to the predatory principle of the
cosmos—the carnivorous deity Sḭ́ di located upriver.

165

166

Chapter 5. The Maloca
The maloca (ḭpɨko, “house,” and particularly bopɨkókn̋, “big house”) is a key institution that combines
residential, social, ceremonial, and political functions. Until the massacres and displacements of the
early twentieth century, the Andoque malocas were pluri-familial houses centered around one clan or
lineage. Today most people live in nuclear-family stilt houses, and there were four Andoque malocas
upon my arrival in April 2018—Fisi, Mario, Heriberto, and Raquel’s—and three when I left in July
2019, as the latter was abandoned a year earlier. The number of Andoque malocas returned to four in
2020, when Tañe built his fourth maloca, but dropped to three again after Fisi dismantled his maloca in
June 2021 in the hope of building a new one (which has not been finished until the conclusion of this
dissertation).40

Figures 9–12. Andoque malocas, from top-left to bottom-right: the malocas of Fisi (May 2018), Raquel (April 2018), Tañe
(July 2021) and Mario (July 2021) (Photos by the author)

People can decide to abandon their malocas for any number of reasons, from the banal crumbling of the thatched roof to a
need of temporary rest from dance organization or a series of catastrophes befalling its inhabitants. They can build new ones
as long as they can secure the necessary workforce, either through persuasion or, as is increasingly the case nowadays, by
hiring laborers.
40

167

Currently, only two Andoque captains and their nuclear families live in their malocas, while the other
malocas serve for the preparation and consumption of food and coca, ceremonial dances, and political
assemblies. Through the rituals held in the maloca, people transform potentially harmful foodstuffs into
life-bringing substances and negotiate with powerful owner-persons to evade diseases, accidents, and
other forms of predation by these entities, thereby promoting the group’s well-being and social
reproduction. The maloca holds an economic function that was more marked before the rubber upheaval
when it roofed tens or over a hundred people (Whiffen 1915, 48, 63): the processing and exchange of
foodstuffs and other substances, the coordination of collective agricultural work and work with nonIndigenous agents, and the distribution of the produce or gains from each such effort. In that period, the
maloca occasionally served as a garrison from which its residents launched aggressive operations, and
where they celebrated victory and exhibited war trophies (Pineda Camacho 2005). Today, meetings with
non-Andoque and non-Indigenous agents held at the maloca communicate to outsiders the social
cohesion necessary for such negotiations, as well as the image of “authentic,” “traditional Indians,” a
strong symbolic instrument that Indigenous people deploy on such occasions (Conklin 1997).
The Andoque maloca is an octagonal structure of four main poles and secondary stakes, roofed with pui
palm leaves, reaching about 8 meters high, with approximately 12 meters in both length and width.
Despite some architectural particularities and the different construction techniques among each ethnic
group, the Andoque maloca shares many similarities with those of other peoples in the Northwest
Amazonia (Gutierrez 2020). They all served similar functions in the past and many of them underwent a
transition to becoming political and ritual centers, acting as a centripetal force in settlements of nuclear
family houses (Franky and Mahecha 2018, 82–83). They all have a sexual division of the internal space,
with the front public area considered masculine, where male visitors are received and where coca is
prepared and consumed, and the rear residential area considered feminine, where food is produced and
consumed (Correa Rubio 1996, 252; García 2018, 424–25). Additional spatial division exists between
the residential compartments of the captain and his family members, and those of residents pertaining to
other categories, such as affines and orphans (Correa Rubio 1996, 249; Lucas 2019, 185–88).
Throughout the region, the maloca is conceived as a larger symbolic representation of the human body
(Gasché 1972, 207; Guyot 1972; Karadimas 2005, 369–99; Londoño Sulkin 2012, 87; Lucas 2019, 182–
83) and models the entire ethnic territory or cosmos (Cayón 2017, 225–50; Goldman 2004, 124–31; S.
Hugh-Jones 1993; García 2018, 176–77; Echeverri 2005, 234). As a ceremonial unit, each maloca is part
of a larger network of ritual exchange with specific allied malocas and holds certain ritual prerogatives,
168

whose enactment reproduces local hierarchies and amounts to claims to political status. In the VaupesApaporis region, we see this reflected in the ceremonial artefacts, musical instruments and immaterial
possessions such as myths and chants held by each Tukanoan descent group (S. Hugh-Jones 1993, 109–
10), while in the Caquetá-Putumayo, this is notably seen in the legitimacy, which depends on birth
order, to hold manguaré drums and a dance beam (Andoque: Tu’sí; Murui-Muina: Yadiko) or to perform
certain dances (Gasché 2009; García 2018, 133–34; Guyot 1972; Karadimas 2005b, 38–41).
To avoid duplicating these ethnographic similarities, I refer the reader to the rich literature cited above.
To explore the power embodied in the maloca, my discussion focuses on the maloca as a heterogenous
assemblage of human and nonhuman beings, whose alignment of agency empowers the captain to
manage the territory and navigate external dangers and opportunities.
The Andoque maloca serves as a concrete manifestation of the prototypical maloca created in mythology
at the center of the world, and each maloca symbolizes the center of the world for its residents.41
However, it is also associated with the river source in different ways. Entering a maloca is expressed
through the prefix yi- which implies ascent, “as if the maloca were a higher zone in comparison with its
surroundings, closer to the west, closer to the sky” (Landaburu 1985, 37). Sḭ́ di, the carnivorous god who
is depicted by some as the father Egret of the River Source and the captain of jaguars from upriver, is
said to protect the malocas modeled after the one built by his son, devouring those wishing to harm them
and their residents. However, although the agents arriving from the river source and the things that they
bring with them are usually perceived as legitimate, life-giving Others, they remain Others, and as such,
are open to criticism through the idiom of the “center.” For instance, the brother of one of the captains,
himself trained in his youth to be one, claimed that “maloca-less” people, like himself, can possess more
knowledge and ability to manage the territory than captains because the maloca did not originate at the
center. Although the original maloca was built there, its founder and the knowledge for its foundation
came from the river source. Therefore, according to him, having a maloca is not a necessary condition to
access knowledge and power.
The two possible maloca positions in relation to the river are explained through the maloca’s important
role in defending the people from dangers coming from the river mouth. The ideal maloca is depicted as
opening onto the east, allowing the maloca owner, seated at his mambeadero, to look toward the river

41

For similar conception among the Miraña and Bora see Karadimas 2013, 196 and Lucas 2019, 182, respectively.

169

mouth, from which most epidemics, enemies, and dangers arrive. However, the four successive malocas
of Tañe, as well as one of Yiñékɒ’s malocas, were built in the other direction, looking onto the West,
and more specifically, to Parrot Savannah (Kɒ́’i Popái), also called Pet Savannah (Ḭéna̰ Popái), a
powerful site controlled by Tofidei, a mythical warlord who is considered as a guardian of the Andoque,
defending himself in mythology from anaconda enemies coming from the river mouth (see Chapter 9),
and whom Tañe indeed cites more often than others as a major spiritual support.
Similar to the perception documented among the Miraña (Karadimas 2013, 196), the mambeadero is the
center of the maloca—indeed, the center of the center—from which the wider territory is organized.
Called taafi taɨ, “site of [yarumo] ashes”, it is a circle of dry, solid earth where yarumo leaves are
burned, and around which the male residents of the maloca or nearby clan members gather every
evening to prepare and consume coca powder. It is located in the masculine part of the maloca, next to
main entrance. This location, which contrasts with the mambeadero’s location among the Miraña and
Murui-Muina—closer to the feminine space, or at the limit between the masculine and feminine ones
(García 2018, 425; Karadimas 2005b, 373)—may owe to the fact that, while these two peoples perceive
coca as a woman, the Andoque consider it a male agent (cf. M2).

170

Figure 13. Ground plan of Fisi’s maloca. Design: Gadiel Levi

The mambeadero serves as the main forum for male socialization, where men chat about the day’s
events, politics, and gossip. As night falls, the conversations become deeper, touching on mythology,
cures, and analysis of disease and other risks and harms that approach the community and should be
diverted. The mambeadores sit in a semicircle, facing the main entrance. When visiting another’s
maloca, they should sit next to the host, rather than facing him. This way, the visitor avoids repeating
Egret of the River Mouth’s fate of distraction by his host’s wife (see Chapter 1) and instead aligns his
perspective with the host’s, both of them looking at the same dangers and opportunities.
Women who are present at the maloca during mambeadero sessions often listen to these talks from the
rear part and can intervene indirectly by commenting aloud to other women present. However, in
settlements without a maloca, coca is prepared and consumed at shacks to which women rarely go. This
decreases women’s participation in daily supra-familial decision-making (as opposed to externally
sponsored community assemblies) and seems to increase their alienation from all that is objectified as la

171

cultura—namely, mythology, dances, and other traditional elements, which become increasingly marked
as men’s business.
In the past, each adult male resident, and especially the maloca owner, used his own self-crafted
backless seat, called kupa, for these sessions, on which other people could not sit. The seat is a powerful
symbol of authority and rootedness in one’s territory. One’s native, Indigenous language is also referred
to as kupa—it is one’s seat, the basis from which one deploys powerful words to act on reality—whereas
sofa is whatever language one may speak, like Spanish nowadays. It is thus telling that today Andoque
malocas do not have the traditional seats, but rather one or two modern seats with a reclined back, and
most mambeadores sit on whatever they can find at the house, like cut-down tree logs or even empty
gasoline cans.
Seated at his mambeadero, the captain’s influence goes beyond the visible conversations he holds with
human visitors. The yarumo burning circle is referred to as katí, “our mother,” because it represents the
territory, which nourishes the people living on it like a mother. A captain is said to be able to spiritually
discern in the circle in front of him the entire ancestral territory, including the territories of the different
beings inhabiting it, and in this way engage in invisible dialog and negotiations with nonhuman entities
to promote the well-being and reproduction of his human community. An apt captain who converses
with nonhuman beings at his mambeadero can manage and intervene in the sites of the ancestral
territory.
The mambeadero is thus one of the things in which the power of the maloca residents, and especially the
captain, is invested. Two other such important things are the manguaré drums and the multiplying beam,
which are not found in all malocas, as their elaboration depends on knowledge not possessed by all
captains. While the manguaré is found in the masculine area, to the right of the main entrance, the
multiplying beam lies to the left of the entrance, crossing through the male and female spaces, as can be
expected from a phallic object that fertilizes the territory and the community.
As Londoño rightfully observes for the Féénemɨna, malocas are “perhaps the most heavily symbolically
charged objects in their [People of the Center’s] world besides human bodies” (2012, 153). As shown in
the works cited above, the People of the Center’s ethnography is replete with accounts of the maloca’s
corporal symbolism. Admittedly, the word designating the rafters descending from the maloca’s ridge in
the Andoque language, to which the pui palm leaves are attached, is ḭ’tanńḛ, which also means “bones,”
and the word for “door” is fí, which also means “mouth.” However, these words can apply not only to
172

malocas but also to all kinds of constructions. Conversely, the symbolism that Andoque captains stress,
and which is also attested in regional ethnography, is one in which the different parts of the maloca and
its main instruments embody powerful spirits of nonhuman entities who defend the house and the group
and back the captain’s actions, as well as mythical figures with whom the captain communicates for
support (Guyot 1972, 162–65; Londoño Sulkin 2012, 85–86; Karadimas 2005b, 386–93). I propose to
view these instruments as nonhuman entities familiarized by the maloca residents—and above all, by the
captain—to make their capabilities available for their human masters, who can align these entities’
agency to their own for their defense and benefit.
The four main poles (paisé) are anacondas (cf. M3) that are “fed” in ceremonial dances, as people leave
game for them, brought by the guests to appease the potentially dangerous anaconda spirits of the
territory.42 The multiplying beam is a powerful anaconda as well, representing the mythical red
anaconda Pe’pai, and the rafters are snakes. The manguaré drum is an old woman, as it once was in
mythology (see M8); the mortar for coca pulverization is an old man, who bestows teachings upon the
one using it, and the earth floor is an extension of Lady Beetle of Life (Pḭofikn), who created the entire
earth—a feminine, life-giving figure, in contrast with the masculine, predatory elements erected on it.43
People can also carve different animals on these parts and instruments, such as anacondas or caimans on
the poles or multiplying beam, or eagles or bats on the lower beams of the rooftop, thereby bestowing on
it the strength, agility, or other characteristics of these animals (see also Whiffen 1915, 91). By
“naming” these parts and instruments after different nonhuman and mythical beings or carving their
figures on them, people invoke these powerful beings and ask them to defend the maloca and support
their actions. After paying a visit to another’s maloca, an ill-willed person can dream of a caiman, an
anaconda or an eagle grabbing him, and, as a result, turn ill: these are the spirits who defend the maloca
warning him (and recall the maloquero’s anecdote about the multiplying beam’s predation on his rival
after a ceremonial dance in Chapter 4). The defense that Sḭ́ di grants the maloca is of a similar nature.
Furthermore, maloca dwellers say that when nobody is home, the instruments they use daily and that are
identified with them, such as the coca mortar, chase away sorcery and different malevolent animal
spirits.

Cf. Guyot 1972, 165.
The identification of the maloca’s floor with Mother Territory exists among the Bora as well (Lucas 2019, 182–83); see
especially Karadimas’s reconstruction of the Miraña’s conception of the maloca as a male figure lying on top of a female one
(2005, 373–81).

42
43

173

As among the Féénemɨna (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 71), the Andoque captains refer to these elements as
consanguine kin, in a way that reflects the familiarization of such external, potentially dangerous agents.
However, they enact “upwards familiarization” by employing kinship terms of relative seniority to
invoke these elements for the protection and assistance that these elements would provide their “true”
descendants. In such a way, the coca mortar and multiplying beam are referred to as grandfathers, the
manguaré as a grandmother, the mambeadero, as already noted, as a mother, and the poles as maternal
uncles.44 These kinship terms exemplify people’s dependence on these nonhuman beings for protection
from and ability to act upon other agents—both nonhuman and human.
The maloca thus emerges as a magnified entity (Fausto 2008; Strathern 1991), comprising various
persons and heterogenous relations that cannot be reduced to its human inhabitants. The maloca, in turn,
magnifies its human constituents, who should themselves be viewed as heterogenous sets of entities that
constitute each person as a plural singularity, as they rely on the forces and characteristics of diverse
things and beings. This magnification reaches its peak with the maloca owner—the ḭdɨño̰, or “personbody trunk”—for whom the forces and capabilities of the different constituents of the maloca are the
most accessible, enabling him to align their agency to his own to achieve well-being in daily and
ceremonial contexts. However, given the risk that the relations of dominion would be inverted, the
employment of kinship terms toward maloca components is not devoid of risk for the human side:
powerful anaconda poles, if not properly fed, or a manguaré or multiplying-beam grandfathers neglected
by their “grandchildren,” will exact their revenge on the captain and his people for having invoked them
in vain. In such cases, it would be these components who eventually familiarize humans, and not vice
versa.
The captain is not only the master of such nonhuman elements, but also of his people—the maloca
residents and workers. A visual indicator of a captain’s power is the size of his maloca, which is
measured by the size of the floor between the four main poles used for dancing during ceremonies. The
larger the floor, the more people can dance and make the captain’s dances resound (as a po’soɵ, “the
famous”), and the social networks that the dances maintain are wider. Tañe of the Sun Clan boasts about

44
The original anaconda people whom Egret of the River Source turned into trees in M3 are the people (kin) of Shadow Egg,
his father-in-law. From Egret of the River Source’s perspective, these people were seen as anacondas because they were
affinal relatives living downstream from him. These anacondas are thus the maternal uncles of the son born to Egret of the
River Source and Shadow Egg’s daughter, who is the first captain. We find a similar association between the main poles and
the hero’s brothers-in-law also among the Miraña, although among this people the brothers-in-law are considered nocturnal
monkeys (Karadimas 2005b, 386–93).

174

having had the biggest floor in his previous malocas (9m2), bigger than Fisi’s (8m2) and Mario and
Raquel’s malocas (7m2). The size of the maloca depends on the number of people at the captain’s
disposal for this and other interrelated works, such as clearing garden plots and organizing dances.
Male elders’ control over the workforce was theorized by Rivière and Turner as a political economy of
persons, where older men control the productive and reproductive activities of younger men and women,
using the material or nonmaterial surplus they produce for the organization of dances to build and retain
a following (in the Guianese case; Rivière 1983) or for the social reproduction of persons as carriers of
symbolic value through naming and household affiliation (in the Kayapo case; Turner 2003). As
mentioned in Chapter 1, while the terms “orphans” and “youth” evoke the vulnerable status of the
captain’s personnel and the expectation of his protective and instructive role—including his capacity in
the past to trade them—the term “workers” (báɵ̋isíɵ́hɵ) reflects the contribution that these individuals
make to the work efforts and projects headed by the maloquero. Therefore, I propose to view the
captain’s ability to align workers’ agency to his own as the inter-human counterpart of the relations of
dominion through familiarization that he maintains with the maloca’s nonhuman components.
The malocas that I visited during fieldwork did not count with these categories of people, most
particularly “orphans,” as the last captain to have possessed them was Yiñékɒ, who attracted survivors
of different clans and ethnic groups to his maloca after the genocide. Additionally, people describe a role
referred to in Spanish as secretario, a worker responsible for preparing tobacco paste and coca powder
for the maloquero in everyday and especially ceremonial dances, when such offerings (ḭtaséa) are
prepared in very small amounts to establish a dialog with guardian spirits. If the maloquero’s wife lacks
the necessary ritual knowledge, he would also have a secretaria to prepare offerings of manicuera
beverage for dances. However, Yiñékɒ and To̰fi are depicted as the last captains to have had relatively
permanent secretarios and secretarias. By contrast, “youth” and “workers” were not described as
categories of the past, and my interlocutors reported that people considered as such passed significant
periods of time in recent decades at different malocas. Their affiliation to each maloca seems to have
owed to different reasons: bride service, economic prosperity, and charisma. Fisi, who has six biological
and adopted daughters, disposed of his sons-in-law and his daughters’ suitors from different ethnic
groups as workers. These men, of Nipóde and Yucuna origin, lived in his maloca in the 1980s, 1990s2000s, as well as for a short period in 2021, helping to build or remodel the maloca and organize dances.
Economic prosperity is often mentioned as having attracted people and families from different clans, as

175

well as a Murui-Muina family, to Tañe’s first maloca during the 1980s–1990s when he coordinated
work with non-Indigenous entrepreneurs. Finally, Raquel and Elias’s maloca housed many unmarried
young men during its heyday in the 1990s. In this case, people cite Raquel’s hospitality and provision of
food, and her son Elias’ contagious enthusiasm in learning how to organize dances, as the reasons
behind that maloca’s popularity.
Whatever the reason that attracts people to a maloca, the captain’s good temper, sexual integrity, and
ability to organize people for work make workers stay, as the captain does not hold any repressive power
over them; the desertion of workers of any of these three malocas is attributed by outsiders or by the
captain’s rivals to his loss of one or more of these virtues.
Throughout the region, a common way to discredit a maloca is by claiming that it was built through a
project or financed by the State, implying that workers were obtained through paid wages rather than by
nurturing proper social relations and exchange with them (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 154). People often
doubt the legitimacy of some of these captains, arguing that they were not born to captaincy lineages and
do not possess the proper knowledge to manage malocas and conduct ceremonial dances. Nevertheless,
all the existing Andoque malocas were either built or renovated using external funds. However, the
captain’s capability, as well as that of his sons, to manage such funds for the benefit of their workers
should also be considered on par with more “traditional” virtues of taking care of the workers’ wellbeing and controlling predatory anger and sexual desire. Moreover, it does not negate the need for the
captain to motivate people for work and set a personal example. In 2020–2021 Andoque captains
received funds to build or renovate malocas through a regional project funded by the program Visión
Amazonía for strengthening traditional governance. One captain, who constructed a new maloca,
managed his funds efficiently and contracted members of his and other clans for the work. On the other
hand, another captain and his sons frivolously spent a significant portion of the funds during a couple of
days in Puerto Santander. Consequently, people were reluctant to help them afterwards, especially since
the nuclear family members were working only sporadically. Although this captain enjoyed the
occasional contributions by another member of his clan, two sons-in-law, and external visitors such as
two French filmmakers who were eager to film the inauguration dance and myself as I was on a visit
there, the maloca remains incomplete at the time these lines are written. This illustrates the importance
of motivating workers even in externally sponsored projects, as well as for captains who, like this

176

particular one, are recognized by most Andoque members as the highest authority in ritual and other
traditional matters.
At first glance, the construction of a maloca simply signals the captain’s authority and power—the fact
that he can obtain many people to work with him. However, we should also understand it as contributing
to the construction of this authority and power, as well as to the shaping of the captain’s persona and
even his body (as well as those of his family members), with which the maloca is, in fact, continuous.
This notion finds support in a host of conceptions and practices, chief among them being the idea that a
burned-down maloca predicts its leader’s death, and any break-in or damage to its main ritual
instruments, such as the manguaré or multiplying beam, is considered a bad omen for him or his family.
Moreover, as noted earlier, these two latter instruments, along with the coca mortar, also serve as vocal
extensions for the captain, allowing his voice to resound far away, like a po’soo. The captain is supposed
to be firmly based at his maloca, seated in his mambeadero, ready to receive visitors, and not to wander
around; he must not leave the circle of ashes for too many nights, lest it “cool down” and the spiritual
power dwelling in it dissipates, leaving the maloca vulnerable to the influence of evil spirits and
animals. Upon death, the captain and his family members are buried under their maloca, and after a
captain’s death the maloca is often abandoned or even intentionally burned down.
The idiom of mastery and familiarization serves as a unifying prism for understanding the participation
of both human and nonhuman beings in the constitution of the owner—in this case, the captain—as a
magnified person, thus enhancing his ability to protect his people. Egret of the River Source, who was
the first to create the maloca, and Sı̰ ́di, his carnivore antecedent from upriver, are two powerful masters
whom a person must familiarize and gain mastery over in order to become a captain at the center. In the
following chapter, we discuss the plants associated with Egret of the River Source, examining they ways
in which the center appropriates them in order to exchange with, prey on, and familiarize various human
and nonhuman beings.

177

178

Chapter 6. The Main Cultivars
While the maloca is a magnified entity that enhances the power of its human constituents and their
captain and locks in essential forces from the river mouth, Andoque members also say, “The power of
the Indigenous lies in the garden” (el poder del indígena está en la chagra)—a statement that I
sometimes heard specifically in relation to women. The garden’s power encompasses at least three
aspects: economic, as gardening allows household subsistence and relative independence from the cash
economy; social, because through sharing and exchanging products elaborated from garden crops,
people create and maintain social relations, as well as participate in the formation of the bodies and
subjectivities of those consuming them; and spiritual, as some of these substances are used to
communicate with nonhuman entities for various purposes. In essence, gardening enables both to
suspend exchange (at least to some extent), and to engage in a beneficially asymmetrical exchange. Like
elsewhere in Amazonia, swiddens are cleared by men and are planted and maintained mainly by
women.45 Since, like other Peoples of the Center, the Andoque accord special importance to manioc,
tobacco, and coca, these are the cultivars I will explore in this chapter, in this order.46 Although, in
mythology, all domesticated plants were brought from the river source to nourish human beings instead
of the wild plants that remained for the animals, these three crops are the most identified as truly
befitting human beings. As with neighboring peoples, these plants are intimately connected with the
origins of human beings. They are associated with human bodily substances and are considered to
embody their qualities; their proper preparation and consumption are believed to enable the formation of
true human beings. This distinguishes humans from faunal beings and protects them from the hostile
forest environment (Echeverri 2015; Griffiths 1998, 146; 2001; Londoño Sulkin 2012, 94–96). This
chapter discusses the capabilities that each plant bestows upon its producers and consumers, and the
two-staged familiarization process surrounding these plants, where the ability to shape the subjectivities
of others for better or worse, align their actions to one’s own, and engage in beneficial exchanges
depends on mastery over the plant and associated nonhuman entities.
Manioc
In this section, I briefly survey Andoque manioc (Manihot esculenta) production and discuss the
capability that its derivatives grant women who master this plant, the nonhuman entities associated with
45
46

For a detailed study of the Andoque’s horticultural practices, see Pineda Camacho 1982.
For a list of the cultivars grown in Andoque gardens, see Pineda Camacho 1982.

179

it and its preparation techniques, to act on others—a capability which is today in decline due to recent
shifts in social and economic reality.
The Andoque associate the garden with female fertility, viewing it as continuous with women’s bodies,
such that their provision of garden produce to their families is seen as continuous with their provision of
food to their children during gestation. As Echeverri (2015) notes, among the People of the Center,
women are considered to be constituted through the cultivation and processing of manioc, chili, and
other tubers and fruits, just as men are constituted through the cultivation and processing of coca and
tobacco. Manioc holds a prominent position in Andoque gardens, and nourishing family members and
other people with its derivatives is conceived as an important female manifestation of power and of
women’s capability to form people.47
According to mythology, the origin of humankind can be traced back to manioc. In one version of the
myth about the origin of cultivated plants (M3), the day after the garden plot was burnt, Egret of the
River Source’s mother-in-law discovered two manioc tubers in the garden, from which men and women
evolved.48 In another myth, Yellow Manioc Leaf (Dopuikn), Nénéfi’s wife, used dough of the manioc
for manicuera (pa̰ḛ́pa) to create the cannibal eagles, from which the Eagle Clan emerged.49 Therefore,
women’s work in maintaining their gardens, harvesting manioc, and processing it is seen as crucial for
the regeneration of humankind.50
Furthermore, this regenerative aspect is associated with women’s own physical regeneration. As we
have seen in M3, Egret of the River Source’s wife received the cultivars and the knowledge on how to
grow them from Lady Beetle of Life, her mother-in-law. This primordial goddess is referred to as katí,
“our mother,” as she seems to have preexisted all other named gods and heroes in Andoque mythology,
the main gods among which are her sons (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 71). Lady Beetle of Life lived in
the Site of Tears, where she built a house reaching the sky. When the flood began, she salvaged all
cultivated plants by taking their seeds and propagules to the sky, from where she showered them back on

Karadimas also finds among the Miraña an equivalence between manioc derivatives and female secretions, see Karadimas
2005, 328–32.
48
There are at least two more myths on the origin of humankind: one from tobacco (see II.2.B) and another, in which men
evolved from a non-identified plant called pó’pai sa’ko, and women evolved from an annatto seed.
49
See Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 70, although in that version she is not mentioned by that name. The same heroine is also
referred to as Egret of the Center’s wife. For the convergence between the different yo’fí figures and earlier clan figures, see
Chapters 1 and 2.
50
Christine Hugh-Jones points to manioc gardening among the Barasana as the female mode of renewal which parallels
men’s renewal through yurupari rites. See (C. Hugh-Jones 1979, 182–84).
47

180

earth with the rain that resulted from the burning of Egret of the River Source’s garden. After the flood,
she descended to earth, to live within it, pushing up to the surface fresh soil instead of the one devastated
by the flood. Today, she is identified with a nymph called Biroriokn (Fidicina chlorogena), which builds
tall mounds (Figure 14). This nymph is classified as a beetle, although once it matures it is classified as
a cicada, which is considered immortal, because, instead of dying, the cicada is thought to transform to a
beetle again—a beetle that will, in turn, become a cicada (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 71–72, 255).
Like in a Baré myth where the vertical pipe built by these larvae allows passage from the underground
to the earth’s surface (S. Hugh-Jones 2016), this “beetle” epitomizes regeneration. Similar to the
Yucuna’s Ñamatú, this master of the earth and subsoil responsible for the soil’s regeneration is a
woman, and more precisely—a primordial mother (Reichel 1989, 83). We can assume that it is assigned
a female sex, and delegates to women the control over the horticultural domain, the cultivars, and the
capabilities these hold to regenerate society, because of women’s own ability to regenerate their very
bodies, i.e., through menstruation.51

Figure 14. A present-day materialization of Lady Beetle of Life’s mythical house. Photo taken by the author.

Wrongfully assuming a strict linear chronological order of Andoque mythical narratives, Fabiola Jara claims that “the
Andoque’s mother [Lady Beetle of Life] cannot be unequivocally classified as a woman” (1996, 227). Jara bases her claim on
the fact that the abovementioned episode occurs before the establishment of sexual distinction in a myth which follows it
chronologically, and on the Andoque’s present-day consideration of beetles in general as male insects who exist without
females, fathering the larvae on their own by inseminating palm trees. However, my interlocutors unequivocally referred to
Lady Beetle of Life as a female character through the feminine suffix -kn and especially the title kamikn which is strictly
feminine and translates into “Lady” or Doña.
51

181

The Andoque cultivate numerous manioc variants, which they categorize into three types: bitter manioc
(máa̋doi) with variants that give either white or yellow tubers; sweet manioc (hɵ́kődoi), and manioc for
manicuera (pa̰ḛ́pa̋dɵi). Among these, the most widely cultivated type is bitter manioc. During my
conversations with women, they mentioned twenty-one variants of bitter manioc cultivated in their
gardens, out of which seventeen are considered proper Andoque ones, which were created with the
Andoque and have a name in their language.52 Most of these variants have white tubers. The remaining
ones are associated with specific ethnic groups from whom Andoque individuals obtained their
propagules, usually in exchange for Andoque manioc. This exchange of propagules establishes bonds of
mutual nurturing that sometimes stretch across long distances, as each propagule is intimately linked
with the woman who cultivates it and is identified with her ethnic group.53
Manioc serves as a key ingredient in the preparation of various products: different types of casabe
manioc bread (poɵte); fariña toasted crumbs (dʉ’hakópi); caguana beverage (bui), for which the starch is
mixed with boiling water, and manicuera drink (ko’ko), made of a special manioc species (both drinks
are non-fermented). Additionally, the leaves are cooked and used as a spice called pi’na. Both
manicuera and caguana hold special ritual significance. The former is associated with milk and the latter
with semen, and each beverage is concocted for ceremonial dances, either by women or men,
respectively. During the dances, a small amount of each beverage, along with small amounts of tobacco,
vegetal salt, and coca, is offered to the owner-persons. This extremely potent and delicate procedure is
known as ḭtaséa and is referred to in Spanish as secretos.
The preparation process of casabe, which is carried out exclusively by women, is the most complex and
laborious among the different manioc derivatives. This process is similar to the second preparation
method that Londoño describes among the Féénemɨna (2012, 109–10), with increasing use of motorpowered grating machines to replace manual graters. In recent years, due to intermarriage and
conviviality with the Murui-Muina, another type of casabe—“dry casabe,” or “Uitoto casabe”—has
become more frequent, and its preparation process is also detailed by Londoño (ibid). During this
process, poisonous liquids are obtained and mixed with chili to prepare the chili broth (kokoeta).
The relationship between the status of women and manioc work has been widely discussed in
Amazonian ethnography. Peter Rivière (1987) sees the variation in the amount of time women dedicate
52
53

For a partial list, see Andoque and Castro 2013, 80.
For a similar practice and conception among the Guianese Piaroa, see Heckler 2004.

182

to manioc work in a given society as a function of the degree of control exercised by men over them,
considering manioc work to have lower prestige compared to men’s hunting. The case of the Tukanoan
groups in Northwest Amazonia exemplifies for him the tedious, taxing, and repetitive character that this
work can receive in virilocal, exogamous, and patrilineal societies. However, other authors have argued
differently, highlighting men’s recognition of the significance of women’s manioc work in different
Amazonian societies (e.g., Descola 1986; Guss 1989; Heckler 2004).
In the case of the Andoque, the complexity of the situation becomes evident. On the one hand, similar to
other practices of feeding in Amazonia (Fausto and Costa 2013), the provision of manioc derivatives by
women creates a vital dependency. Through manioc production, women can influence others,
fabricating them as kin and as specific kinds of persons—as consanguineous persons, who would behave
favorably to these women and their kin. This grants women a certain power and challenges the notion of
manioc work solely as a means of women’s subordination entrenched in an unchanging social structure.
On the other hand, historical shifts in patterns of manioc preparation and consumption, as well as
changes in community demographics, have reduced the centrality of women in manioc production and
their access to the power that comes from providing manioc derivatives.
In Andoque discourse, hɵɵ́i (“word”) stands for thoughts that are externalized through speech and
action,54 and people usually refer to gardening, cooking, and manioc preparation as “a woman’s word”
(tí’i nihɵɵ́i). Admittedly, “a woman’s word” includes various things that men may perceive as
unfavorable, such as women’s potential to distract men and sabotage their plans for conviviality and
social organization, of which Andoque mythology provides numerous instances—for example, the
casabe prepared by the mother in M2 that caused her husband’s death because it contained her anger.
However, men also acknowledge other, more beneficial “women words,” through which the latter can
act on others and influence their actions to contribute to the household and lineage into which they
marry—primarily by providing manioc products.
Manicuera epitomizes woman’s capability to act on others through the manipulation of manioc. It is
considered women’s signature substance, just as coca and tobacco are men’s signature substances, as the
quantity and quality of manicuera a woman serves attests to her worth. However, in contrast to these two
masculine substances, which hold predatory potentialities, manicuera acts on others through its

54

For a similar concept among the Murui-Muina, see Echeverri 2022, 43.

183

regenerative, life-giving aspects. Women often declare that manicuera is their force (tí’i kasn’bei), using
the word sn’be which carries physical connotations and is used to describe torrential waters, a fastrunning animal, or whatever person who can work hard and carry heavy weight. While coca and tobacco
can also be referred to as “men’s force” (yó’hɵ yasn’bei), men usually refer to the power that these
substances give them through the evocation of the more abstract auxiliary spirit tne’túi, as we will see in
the following sections.
As among the Féénemɨna, an Andoque maloquera is expected to always have a manicuera ready to
welcome visitors and appease them, transforming whatever negative feeling they may have, such as
anger and jealousy, into a more favorable approach toward the maloca residents (Londoño Sulkin 2012,
109–11). Upon starting to prepare a ceremonial dance, and together with tobacco paste and coca powder
shared by the host captain, the maloquera serves manicuera to the dance workers to guarantee their
unanimity. By giving them that drink, she infuses in them her intention to carry out an effective, lifegiving ceremony (de la Hoz 2005, 60–61). The serving of manicuera in the dance itself is important
because, by appeasing the guests, the host also appeases the spirit masters (Chapter 11). Like the other
substances discussed in this chapter, manicuera provision reflects a gift logic, where a detached part of
its producer passes to its consumer, potentially affecting the latter’s dispositions. However, nowadays,
this female power is rarely exercised, as manicuera is very seldom prepared and consumed by Andoque
members, including at the Andoque malocas: during my fieldwork, I only drank it twice, at two
households out of the seven among which I rotated. Interestingly, Raquel served me manicuera during
my first days in her maloca—perhaps as a way to make my stay and research favorable to her and her
family.
Gardening and manioc processing involve vast knowledge passed from mother to daughter, from which
men, for the most part, are excluded, increasing their dependence on women. Girls are trained from an
early age for gardening, harvesting manioc, and identifying variants by name, which encapsulates
information about the proper ways to use that variant and cater for it. In addition to the technical skills, a
manioc producer should also master symbolic ones. Both manioc plants and the tools used for
processing them are humanized, and maintaining a good relationship with them is important for
achieving a big yield and producing large amounts of starch. The plants are said to grow faster if their
“mother”—the woman who has planted them—visits them often, showing them love (Andoque and
Castro 2013, 75). On one occasion, when I cut myself grating tubers with Irene, she told me that it

184

happened because we were talking: “The person who grates manioc must keep silent because grating is
like cleaning the grater’s face, like you do for a person you love; if you’re distracted while doing it, the
grater thinks you don’t love it, it gets jealous, and hurts you.” Women increase the efficiency of manioc
processing through certain symbolical techniques rooted in mythology. When separating the starch from
the pulp, women may exhale on their hands while invoking Lady Kḛkḛ (a frog, dendrobates sp.), who
used to sleep until the afternoon, going to the garden to collect the small tubers discarded by her co-wife,
Lady kɒ’kɒ (Bujo ceratophrys; also means vulva), but who managed to gather a larger amount of starch
than her co-wife did.55
Girls are trained in manioc processing and casabe preparation so they can later provide healthy food for
their children and engage in a relatively symmetrical exchange of foodstuffs with their future
husbands—an arrangement referred to as “mutual demand” by Gow (1991). However, people often
express their concern that nowadays girls spend less time with their mothers because they attend school,
resulting in diminished learning opportunities about gardening and manioc processing. Living with boys
and away from their parents in the boarding school of Araracuara, a rising number of girls become
pregnant in their teen years or hastily move in with their boyfriends without acquiring the necessary
knowledge a woman should have. “The young girls who get married today don’t know even how to flip
a casabe!”, exclaimed one woman. People fear that these girls run the risk of raising unhealthy children
and becoming trapped in asymmetrical, unstable matrimonial relationships.
Men’s acknowledgement of the power that women exercise through manioc preparation is also
demonstrated by the only exception to the performance of manioc work by women: caguana for
ceremonial purposes. This beverage, which on everyday occasions is prepared by women, is elaborated
by men for ceremonial dances and for the preliminary ritual of caguana serving (obiikoi), which is held a
night before the major tutelary dances. Caguana, symbolizing semen, is drunk in large amounts in
dances to ensure the drinkers’ health and fertility.56 However, everyday caguana is not considered as
potent as manicuera, but it becomes especially important when prepared for the caguana serving ritual,
where it is also mixed with mauritia (Mauritia flexuosa) dough identified with the belligerent guardian
hero Tofidei (“Mashed Mauritia Fruit”). It is consumed in this ritual for the defense of the patrilineal
group organizing the dance before the affinal exchange during the dance itself, which may put the

55
56

For a slightly different version of the story, see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 153–59.
For a similar practice among the Féénemɨna, see Londoño Sulkin 2012, 112.

185

organizers at risk (see Chapter 12). Based on the presumption that foodstuffs are infused with the
subjectivities of their producers, I propose that men prepare this ceremonial caguana themselves to
ensure that no affinal element, such as women, intervenes in its elaboration.
In this regard, it is noteworthy that while in practice, girls are typically trained for manioc work by their
mothers, M3, shared by both men and women, presents a different perspective. According to the myth,
the knowledge of manioc species and processing techniques comes from the mother-in-law, Lady Beetle
of Life. This might reflect an agnatic ideal according to which, upon marriage, a woman’s manioc work
should be tailored to suit her husband’s and future children’s needs, as they belong to a different clan.
Another mythical narrative, M12 (see Appendix 1), also alludes to such an ideal. In this story, manioc
first grew as fruits on trees tended by female animals, who poisoned the orphan pipe blower U’ḭknñemn
with the casabe they provided, as the manioc starch of which it was made did not rest for three days,
failing to neutralize the poisonous liquid it contains. It is revealing that the mythical figure who fells the
manioc tree and foresees the descent of manioc from the sky— associated with the river source and with
Lady Beetle of Life’s bestowal of the tubers and instructions how to prepare manioc to the benefit of
humanity—is this trickster hero who struggles in different ways against his mother and maternal
relatives to regain the agency possessed by his late father. This myth seems to reflect the idea that, left to
their own device, women (and by extension their origin clans) have the power to harm men (and people
in the clans to which they marry) through the provision of manioc derivatives. Consequently, there is an
underlying idea that manioc production by women should be regulated or contained by the family into
which a woman marries, reflecting the agnatic encompassment of affinal agency. However, my male
and female interlocutors did not mention any actual practices of such calibration.
Other historical processes have eroded the exercise of female power through the provision of manioc
derivatives. While traditionally casabe, along with chili paste, was considered the typical manioc-based
companion for meat or fish, nowadays most families replace it with fariña due to its easier preparation in
large quantities and its ability to be stored for extended periods. The fariña preparation process is similar
to the one reported by Estorniolo among the Baniwa (2020, 476–86), with the exception that the
Andoque use a heavy object, such as unused beams, to squeeze out the liquids instead of a tipití. Fariña
is a relatively recent addition to the Andoque diet. Unlike other manioc products, it holds no ritual
significance. People explain that it entered the region through Brazilian merchants and Peruvian rubber
bosses but gained widespread popularity during the post-genocide rubber boom, when men and some of

186

their wives lived for several months a year in rubber tapping camps.57 Fariña, which can withstand
equatorial humidity and be stored for long periods, was the rubber bosses’ cost-effective means to feed
their workers in the absence of manioc gardens or sometimes women to process manioc. As a
consequence, people became increasingly accustomed to consuming fariña during work seasons, and in
today’s unbalanced gendered demographics, where relatively many Andoque men live without a spouse,
men also partake in fariña production, which is not as gendered as casabe preparation. Additionally,
since people prefer using the starchier yellow variants for fariña production, these variants, mainly of
non-Andoque origin, dominate many people’s gardens, at the expense of Andoque variants on which
women hold superior knowledge. This increase in fariña production signifies a certain decrease in men’s
dependence on women and weakens women’s ability to exert influence on men through the provision of
manioc products more closely identified with them and their regenerative forces.
Therefore, the potentialities that manioc holds for women to act on others, familiarize them, and imbue
them with a subjectivity favorable to themselves and to their kin should rule out claims that manioc
work is an unequivocal way to subordinates them to masculine control. However, the present-day
decline of the centrality of women’s knowledge and skills in manioc preparation corresponds to their
general disempowered position in society, which is reflected, inter alia, in the general belittling of their
ritual, political, and economic role by men.
Tobacco
While manioc production is predominantly a female activity and area of mastery, the two other principal
substances that the center received from the river source—coca and tobacco—are associated with men.
Nowadays, tobacco paste stands in stark contrast to casabe, as the latter is prepared exclusively by
women and is consumed by everyone, while the former is prepared by men and is also consumed by
women, as well as children. Coca, on the other hand, is both prepared and consumed solely by men—not
even by post-menopausal women, as people say was the case for tobacco before the rubber upheaval. 58
The only exception is Fisi’s wife and their daughters, which people attribute to the wife’s Macuna
origin—as Macuna women consume coca. However, even they do not consume it in public.

For a similar rise of fariña consumption in similar conditions among the Xikrin of Central Brazil, see Fisher 2000, 83.
Whiffen (1915, 68, 144), by contrast, reported both substances to be a taboo for women and children, without mentioning
age-related exceptions.
57
58

187

Despite Echeverri and Pereira’s (2005) convincing case for coca’s advent in the Colombian Amazon as
late as the nineteenth century, these two substances are usually treated in the literature on the People of
the Center in an a-historical manner, as if they have always co-existed and complemented each other in
fabricating true human bodies and subjectivities (e.g., García 2018; Karadimas 2000; 2005).
Ethnographers of neighboring peoples have shown tobacco’s association with agnatic transmission, in
contrast to coca’s association with affinal exchange (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 79; García 2018, 410, 449–
50). Authors have demonstrated how these substances are used for the seemingly opposing ends of
predation and the construction of sociability. On the one hand, these substances have been described as
participating in the formation of real, moral human beings, who are compassionate for kin, in control of
their anger and desires, and capable of defending themselves from the immoral nonhuman beings
seeking to sabotage human society (García 2018, 457–58; Griffiths 1998; Londoño Sulkin 2012). On the
other, Indigenous interlocutors attribute predatory capabilities to these substances, and especially to
tobacco (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 79; García 2018, 454). Predation and sociability may in fact be seen as
complementing each other. Among the Féénemɨna, clan members conceive of themselves as
consubstantial because they stem from the same tobacco plant; hence, this tobacco promotes sociable
sentiments and actions within the group while imposing aggressive measures toward the outside
(Londoño Sulkin 2012, 99–101). With respect to the Murui-Muina, Echeverri described tobacco as a
predatory agent which does away with anti-social elements: through “tobacco hunting,” people make
negative sentiments and behavior materialize as animals that they subsequently hunt (Echeverri 1997,
153–54). The ambiguity of these substances—and especially tobacco—as they oscillate between
predation to sociability, is also contextualized within the regional transition from “the Basket of
Darkness” to “the Basket of Life.” In a Bora myth, published by Lucas (2019, 373–74), Egret-of-CoolTobacco creates a tobacco plant that transforms into a person called Tobacco-of-Knowledge (also called
Tobacco-of-Leadership). After this person re-transforms into a tobacco plant, Egret asks his
grandmother to remove the plant Tobacco-of-Animals from the maloca’s patio, whose leaves then
transform into different jaguar species. Tobacco, which is associated with jaguars in various Amazonian
societies (Fausto 2004; Lévi-Strauss 1964, 107–8; Métraux 1946, 60–62), assumes among neighboring
peoples moralistic, peaceful names, such as “cool tobacco,” “tobacco of enlightenment,” or “tobacco to
cause to feel shame” (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 99–100).
In this section I examine Andoque tobacco culture and demonstrate the various attributes and
capabilities it bestows upon people for sociability, leadership, and healing. I argue that these attributes
188

stem from tobacco’s association with predation and with its ability to familiarize others in order to
appropriate their bodies, vital elements, and agencies. Similar to coca, which will be discussed in the
next section, Andoque members link tobacco to the carnivorous Sḭ́ di to relations of predation/alliance
along the river. In other words, the affinal dimensions of tobacco and coca are a crucial factor
determining their potency in the familiarization of other human and nonhuman affines. Therefore, these
substances must themselves undergo familiarization, a process reflected in their preparation etiquette
and evident in mythology, where the affinal element is encompassed by agnation. Tobacco, for example,
which is linked with the affinal outside, is rendered useful to the center through the consanguinizing
effect of vegetal salt; it transitions from embodying affinal relatives to representing the hero’s father. In
the case of coca myths, as compared with those of neighboring peoples, affinal figures—the wife and the
father-in-law—are marginalized, leading to a largely agnatic origin myth for coca, where it sprouts from
the deceased father’s body (M2). Such measures ensure that these substances are more closely identified
with their producers, enabling the latter to employ them more effectively to engage in asymmetrical
exchanges that are beneficial to themselves and their kin.
The tobacco (tá’u) cultivated by the Andoque is Nicotiana tabacum, although they often refer to a
stronger “wild tobacco,” found in the forest and said to have been consumed by sages, healers and
sorcerers in the past, and that probably belongs to the species Nicotiana rustica. The cultivation and
preparation of tobacco require specific knowledge and self-restraint that is not equally shared by
everyone, resulting in unequal amounts of tobacco that each person can deploy for different purposes.
Unlike manioc and coca, but like peanuts, tobacco seeding and growing necessitates a special diet that
avoids certain substances considered “too strong”—too acidic or high in fat, such as peach palm beer,
cashew apples, larvae, and certain types of fish to prevent infestation of the tobacco plant with worms.
Alcohol consumption is also prohibited as it may lead to the leaves drying out and hindering the plant’s
growth. The Andoque recognize that these dietary guidelines may apply to them, but not to Whites, as
they believe that Whites’ tobacco plants can grow tall and healthy regardless of their diet, “because this
is how the Creator left it for us.”59 Due to their inability to strictly adhere to this dietary regime, the
Andoque claim that they now have less tobacco (and peanuts) than their ancestors, who supposedly
possessed greater self-control.

See also Pineda Camacho 1982, 30. For a similar diet among the Murui-Muina, see García 2018, 437, and Griffiths 1998,
131.
59

189

The traditional way of consuming tobacco is as tobacco paste (yʉbʉ) or tobacco juice (yʉbʉdíe), both
referred to in regional Spanish as ambíl. To prepare ambíl, tobacco leaves are harvested, washed, boiled,
and the filtered juice is cooked and stirred for many hours with added manioc starch, charcoal, specific
seeds (e.g., maraca seeds [Theobroma bicolor]), or tree barks for smell, taste, and viscosity. In times of
tobacco shortage—and even for ritual purposes—ambíl can also be prepared from unrolled cigarettes,
that are cooked in the same process. Once prepared, ambíl can be stored for long periods of time. To use
it, people mix it with vegetal salt that reduces the tobacco’s acidity and activates amylase secretion,
allowing for the absorption of the plant’s alkaloids (Echeverri et al. 2001). A larger proportion of salt to
tobacco yields a milder paste preferred by women, while tobacco paste and juice with smaller quantities
of salt are considered more masculine, being stronger and more effective in attracting “the knowledge of
the jaguar.”60
Salt preparation is the most complex and ritualized part of the process. While salt can be extracted from
the roots, leaves, stems, or other parts of many plants, only several dozen have a name in Andoque and
are considered suitable for the preparation of tobacco paste.61 For the Andoque, vegetal salt is associated
with a feminine entity, and mythology (M13, Nestor and Fisi, 20/10/18) tells of Lady Salt (Ñɒkɒkn), the
original master of salt plants. According to this myth, she sent her sons to find salt, but each plant either
deceived the searcher, appearing to him as a person and sending him somewhere else, or simply ran
away and transformed into a tree. Many salt plants received their names from the ways they reacted
when meeting the searcher: dedekn “running on tiptoes”; foíñɒkɒ, “tinamou salt,” because it whistled
like a tinamou bird, etc. The youngest son managed to find the salt plants in much the same way that
Egret did it in M1, simply by embracing it and not being misled by its speech. The salt plants that did
not pose any problems, are considered the most adequate for salt preparation for ritual dances. Since the
last son managed to find salt, Lady Salt ceded the salt to men but attached a curse to it: if men were to
think of women or have sex while engaging in this work, they would obtain very little salt or of a bad
quality that would distract people from the right track.
On the way back home, the package of harvested salt plants must not be laid on the ground, because “the
salt will remain wherever it was laid”—and not at the bottom of the pot, as it should—resulting in a

In the Murui-Muina distinction between the feminine Muina and masculine Murui, the former’s ambíl is milder, saltier,
and in native definitions, “sweeter” than the latter’s (García 2018, 159).
61
Echeverri et al. (2001) count sixty-eight types of vegetal salt among the Murui-Muina, obtained from sixty species and one
insect species.
60

190

small yield. Back in the house, the plants are burned on specific woods that are known to burn out fast.
The ashes are placed on a filter of the ko’tiñepo fern leaves (Pteridaceae sp.) at the bottom of a conic
funnel made of wild plantain leaves (Phenakospermum guyanense), and the water poured over the
funnel and gathered in a vessel under it absorb the salt found in the ashes. This water is then boiled
while carefully stirring it to achieve the ideal state where all liquids evaporate yet the salt, obtained at
the bottom of the pot, does not burn. During this process, those who have gathered the salt plants cannot
urinate or talk excessively so as not to let the salt evaporate with the water.
When preparing vegetal salt for a ceremonial dance, the restrictions are more numerous and severe: the
producers cannot eat during the boiling of the salty water; they cannot leave the maloca or speak to
anyone outside their team until salt from the first batch of burned plants is obtained; nobody present at
the maloca can be angry, have sexual intercourse or think of sexual affairs, and other visitors cannot
enter the maloca, especially not pregnant women or their husbands. Infraction of these rules will damage
the salt quantitatively and qualitatively, resulting in a little amount of “ugly” salt, unsuitable for spiritual
dialog. Obtaining poor salt for a dance is considered a bad omen, that can augur different misfortunes,
even the death of its producers. Often figuring in people’s speech as a metonymy for other ritual
substances, vegetal salt is described as analogous to money for non-Indigenous people: by offering salt,
a person can converse with human and especially with nonhuman beings, convincing them not to attack
him and to support his actions.
What capabilities and powers does tobacco grant those who use it? Tobacco paste plays a crucial role in
engaging in dialog with nonhuman entities for a wide array of purposes: to protect one’s family and
community from the territory’s many dangers, to safely visit certain sites of the territory in which
powerful spirits are said to live, for a successful hunt, to heal people or bewitch them, and to learn and
memorize myths, spells, and other ritual procedures, all of which require exchange with certain guardian
spirits. Alongside coca, when tobacco is used for healing, sorcery, or teaching, it familiarizes people for
better or worse, making these patients consanguineous with the person employing it or with the spirits
whom he invokes. When used in communication with nonhuman entities, tobacco is likewise used to
familiarize these entities, transforming their actions into ones that are favorable to the human
interlocutors (see Chapter 9). Smoked tobacco, in the form of manufactured cigarettes, is used for
certain spells and cures, as well as to keep away malignant spirits when walking in the forest.

191

Tobacco plays a pivotal role in ceremonial dances, as the host captain shares it alongside coca—and
manicuera, served by the maloquera—with his workers to instill in them his intention of carrying out an
effective, life-giving ceremony. This act serves as a form of familiarization, whereby the captain and his
wife imbue their people with the feelings and inclinations that they themselves possess, aligning their
people’s actions with their own. Tobacco paste and salt are also given to the guest upon inviting him to
the dance for the same purpose. During the event, tobacco paste and juice are served to the singerdancers who challenge the host group by voicing complaints through their songs about insufficient
amounts of food, ritual substances, or the general poor organization of the dance (see Chapter 11).
Again, these substances are offered to align their subjectivity with that of the dance organizers and to
offset their affinal, predatory tendencies. Tobacco defines the ritualized relations between host and
guest, as the guest is referred to as ḭtáufa: “the one who receives tobacco.”62
The predatory nature of tobacco permeates Andoque discourse and practices. Narrators associate
tobacco’s origin to that of “the coca of the orphans” (M2), recounting that after the dead father budded
as a coca plant, he then budded as tobacco. Fisi commented to me that the first tobacco was named tosé
because when the plant budded the orphans heard it clacking, “to!” like a jaguar’s fang. Subsequently,
they heard the sound “ta!”, and the elder asked the younger: “what is it?”, to which the latter replied:
“tá’u; tá’u ḭño̰” (“tobacco; jaguar tobacco”). The orphans realized that through the consumption of
tobacco, they could transform into jaguars, learn how to sing jaguar songs, and invoke the jaguar’s
aggressive spirit and its powers to assist them in waking life and dreams. At first glance, this origin story
seems like a variant of a myth on the origin of tobacco found also among the Murui-Muina and Bora,
where the plant is the son of the Creator or of a deity, and is associated with the wisdom transmitted
within the patriline (García 2018, 443–47; Lucas 2019, 372–74). However, by revisiting the jaguar fangs
after exploring other origin myths below, I will demonstrate that the vertical, agnatic bond presupposes a
horizontal, affinal relationship, from which tobacco draws its predatory attributes.
Pineda reports ceremonial sowings taking place as late as the 1970s, during which tobacco seeds are
scattered in all directions, naming them “jaguar tobacco,” “harpy eagle tobacco,” and “anaconda
tobacco” (Pineda Camacho 1982, 30). Unlike coca sub-varieties named after these predatory animals
and consumed exclusively by sorcerers, this practice was common for all kinds of tobacco. Tobacco

62

For a similar definition of ritual partners among the Bora, see Guyot 1972, 173; Lucas 2019, 203.

192

endows its consumers with a predatory perception, which, within the perspectival cosmos they inhabit,
places them in a superior position in relation to their human and nonhuman adversaries.
Like coca, tobacco grants people access to tne’túi, the auxiliary spirit imparted by Sı̰ ́di (see Chapter 7),
and, as we will see below, to its related ocelot spirit masisi. In addition to seeing themselves as created
from manioc tubers, as in M3, the Andoque also tell a story where a man and a woman were created
from the tobacco smoke blown by this carnivorous god who resides upriver.63 Reflecting recognition of
the predatory, aggressive tendencies inherent in human beings and essential for survival and
reproduction, this myth leads us to the importance of tobacco sharing among people, as tobacco paste is
also shared, alongside coca powder, in the nocturnal mambeadero sessions, to produce weighty words
and cogent discourse. In an encounter between two tobacco-consuming men (or parties), the
commensality implied in the sharing of tobacco creates a convergence of predatory perspectives.
Through this convergence, the two sides assume together the same predatory stance towards a third
party, relegating the latter to the position of prey. As predation is projected towards the outside,
conversation can flow inside, between the two sides.
The predatory principle also appears in the origin story of tobacco for captaincy, as published by
Landaburu and pineda (1984, 163–65). In this myth (M14), summarized in Appendix 1, Paternity Canoe
(O̰poipúkn; today it is the Heliornis fulica sungrebe, Andoque: koé) is sent fishing with his wife by her
father, Shadow Egg. He suddenly hears sighs coming from where his later father used to smoke fish. He
finds a small plant and rejoices: “So this is my father’s heritage! I’m going to live like my father. I am
going to have personnel like him!” The People of the Stars (fɵɵ’ko síɵ́hɵ), the to̰’ḛdi nocturnal
butterflies and Hummingbird bless the plant, from which Paternity Canoe prepares tobacco paste to
share with his people. The latter say: “The captain of the center of the earth is living off his father’s
words.” Egret of the Center also visits Paternity Canoe, exchanging pineapple for tobacco seeds.
The beings who bless the plant live in the air or sky and are thus connected with a superior predatory
position; the Stars, as we have seen in Chapter 2, are especially carnivorous. Paternity Canoe is said to
live in Spawning River (Ḭpá̰se, commonly known as Monochoa), which lies upriver from Araracuara, at
the westernmost limit of the Andoque ancestral territory (cf. Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 76). As a
sungrebe, Paternity Canoe (as well as his father) is a predator of fish, and we can infer that the tobacco
For a similar story among the Féénemɨna, see Londoño 2012, 97–98. Akin to the Bora (Lucas 2019, 138), the Féénemɨna
consider themselves as descended from tobacco.

63

193

plant grows from the fish that his father used to smoke, i.e., from the affinal relatives coming from
downriver from Spawning River. Tobacco’s association with agnation thus presupposes an earlier
association with affinity, to which we will return below. More precisely, tobacco is associated here with
affines from downriver (and not from the river source), who are thus perceived as aquatic beings by a
hero who resides upriver from them and is an animal living on the river surface, i.e., higher than them.
From myths related to Shadow Egg examined above, we can infer the reason why Paternity Canoe
needed his father’s help: to perceive the fish that Shadow Egg probably hid from him, as is his custom.
It is by sharing the blessed tobacco with the fish he has caught, that he creates a predation-based
commensality with them, familiarizing them and turning them into his personnel. The center acquires
the tobacco through marital exchange. Even though in usual discourse Andoque members describe
tobacco as a masculine agent, dream interpretation betrays its feminine origin, as a dark or pregnant
woman in dreams signifies abundant tobacco paste. This feminine tobacco is exchanged for pineapple,
which possibly stands for the sister of a man from the center for the Andoque, as it does for the Miraña
(Karadimas 2005b, 351–52).
Tobacco is not only used for predation, but also for countering predation, namely for healing, which is
itself a predatory a procedure where the healer and his auxiliary spirit prey on the pathogenic agent.
M15, detailed in Appendix 1, narrates the origin of tobacco for healing, and sheds further light on
tobacco’s association with agnation and affinal relations. In this myth, Paternity Canoe goes night
fishing with his wife, Sun’s daughter. With every fish he catches, her body is consumed piece by piece
without his notice, until she vanishes by dawn. Sun threatens to devour Paternity Canoe unless his
daughter is restored. While the latter ponders this challenge, he hears a sound from where his late father
used to smoke fish. The tobacco plant he discovers there leads him to Cashew Apple-Anaconda
(Kɒ̰́n̋nkn hɵpɵ), which has swallowed his wife. After cutting open the anaconda’s belly and retrieving
his wife’s bones, Paternity Canoe blows tobacco smoke over them, reconstructing her functioning body
and bringing her back to life.
In another version of the story that I was told, the protagonist’s name was Egret of the River Source, and
it is possible that Paternity Canoe is the latter’s precedent in the pre-egret mythology. “My father told
me that if you live with a woman from another tribe, you must learn this story, in case she falls ill and
you need to save her, or else you will be in trouble with her family,” told me Fisi, who indeed married a
Macuna woman, upon telling me this myth. Therefore, tobacco, which embodies the father and draws its

194

powers from agnation, is essential for exogamous exchange. Albeit a predator of fish, as a sungrebe
Paternity Canoe is also a potential game for Sun, who represents a higher elevation stratum. When
threatened with such predation, Paternity Canoe turns to his father, who assumes here the role of a
shadow, or specter (both are ká’hɵi)—the very opposite of the light-giving sun—to counter the actual
predation by the anaconda and the potential predation by Sun.
In the specific alliance-predatory constellation of this myth, which includes Sun instead of Shadow Egg
as father-in-law, the fish and anaconda represent Paternity Canoe’s relatives or the people that he (or his
father) has turned into relatives. They are depicted as fish because they retain affinal traces that account
for their recalcitrance towards Paternity Canoe, leading them not to respect him and prey on his wife.
This is also why Sun threatens to take revenge on Paternity Canoe by devouring him—to compensate for
his daughter’s being devoured by her affinal relatives.
Nonetheless, the two myths involve a certain ambiguity as to tobacco’s origin: Does it embody the
father or the fish that the father smoked? This ambiguity points to ambíl’s function not solely as a
predatory substance, but, more precisely, as a substance that allows to move from predation to
familiarization, transforming horizontal relations of alliance into vertical mastery and leadership
relations. Therefore, I suggest that tobacco does not inherently embody the father or fish but rather the
verticalizing potentiality granted by the father of turning fish/affines into complacent consanguines.
This ambiguity also leads us from the familiarizing potentiality of tobacco in Andoque eyes to its
familiarized aspect. These myths, especially M15, represent an interesting variation on tobacco myths
from the Apaporis River, which are clearer in terms of the plant’s affinal origin. In the Barasana myth
documented by S. Hugh Jones (1979, 298), Fish Anaconda is angry with the hero Yeba for having
married his daughter without his consent and threatens to devour him unless he provides him with meat
and fruits. Through his daughter, he gives Yeba a fish-shaped tobacco cigar. Despite being told not to do
so, Yeba eats it, causing his belly to swell, experiencing violent diarrhea, and eventually defecating
outside the house, from which tobacco plants grow. Similar myths exist among the Cabiyari, Taiwano,
and Yucuna, where the father-in-law gives the hero specific instructions on where to defecate around the
house (Correa Rubio 1996, 352; Kabiyari et al. 1989, 86–87; von Hildebrand 1979, 428). In these myths,
the tobacco is received from the father-in-law and represents his children or relatives (the fish, for whom
the anaconda is the master). In the Tanimuka myth, the nocturnal butterfly blessing the tobacco plant—
like it does in M14, without any mention of kinship status—is explicitly referred to as the hero’s father-

195

in-law (von Hildebrand 1979, 429). In contrast, for the Andoque, the tobacco is associated with the
affinal fish that have already been caught, processed, and maybe even consumed by the hero’s father.
The Andoque myths reflect a transition from considering tobacco as a plant deriving from the affinal
realm and received from real affines (hosts in dances) or potential ones (animals in mythology), to
considering it, as is common among the People of the Center, as agnatic, passing within the clan from
father to son. This affinal import must be familiarized and mastered by the Andoque living at the center
in order to be fully beneficial for them.
We can now revisit the origin of the tose tobacco and its association with jaguar fangs. This detail
emerges in a myth distinct from M2, to which Fisi linked it, yet due to the underlying theme of
knowledge being indirectly transmitted from father to orphans, it is clear why he associated the two
stories. My interlocutors referred to this myth as “the Story of False Egret and the Jaguars from the
Stars,” as it recounts a captain’s failure to control his aggressiveness. Because of its perceived danger,
this story was told to me only in fragments. In this myth (M16), as it is summarized in Appendix 1 from
the version recorded by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 123–27), Nénéfi, who resides in the sky,
dispatches his men, the ocelots of the stars, to hunt on earth. While they are catching fish from a stream,
Egret of Center steals the clothes they have placed on the riverbank. Upon discovering the theft, the
ocelots negotiate with him, leaving him one suit. When the Egret dons the suit at a dance, he devours his
guests, except for two who manage to escape and burn the maloca, trapping Egret inside. Thanks to the
moisture in his nostrils, Egret’s nasal bone does not burn; it transforms into bees instead, and these are
detected by Sı̰ ́di, another bumblebee, who reports it to Nénéfi. Masisi, the jaguar spirit associated with
Nénéfi, descends to earth and circles the jaguar fangs, seeking vengeance for the deeds committed
against his father.
Hence, jaguar fangs draw the jaguar spirit associated with predators—Nénéfi and his messenger, Sı̰ ́di.
The name of one of the bees created from the ocelot’s nostrils, as Fisi explained to Jara, sheds further
light on the relevance of this myth to our tobacco discussion: ñɒ’kɒkn, meaning “Lady Salt” (1996, 242).
Jara notes that the Andoque regard all insects of the Hymenoptera order as masculine, viewing their
sting as the penis through which they transform the stung animal into their offspring (ibid, 247). The
nostrils’ retained moisture, which spared them from burning, thus emerge as the moisture of semen.
Indeed, as Echeverri and Oscar Román-Jidutjaaño observe for the Murui-Muina, the significance of
vegetal salt goes beyond its chemical role in facilitating alkaloid absorption; it is symbolically linked

196

with semen. By contrast, tobacco is associated with menstrual blood, such that mixing the two
substances parallels fecundation (Echeverri and Román-Jitdutjaaño 2013, 10). This explains the strict
etiquette concerning the preparation of vegetal salt among the People of the Center, which the authors
view as a model for sexual education, as it instructs young men how to control and channel their desires.
This is why a pregnant dark woman in Andoque dreams represents abundant tobacco paste: it
symbolizes feminine tobacco impregnated by the man’s salt. If tobacco is associated with women and a
man’s affinal relatives, adding salt is necessary for familiarizing them, instilling that man’s dispositions
in them to ensure the alignment of their agency to his and his clan’s, and not vice versa. Similar to M13,
young men must overcome their mothers and, by extension, their maternal relatives, to find salt plants
and create their own semen to pass on their patrilineal clan identity. Without producing salt (or
containing semen to give to his wife) a man is easily overpowered by his wife’s family, as is
demonstrated in the M17 (see Appendix 1), where Pretty cannot produce salt as effectively as his
powerful father-in-law Sun, resulting in his body diminishing, leaving only his head, instead of
reproducing and expanding.
Returning to M16, we note that, as Egret of the Center, overtaken by the fire symbolizing the alien
predatory aggressiveness he had imprudently appropriated, was consumed, the only element to remain
vital and capable of reproduction and regeneration at the center was the part associated with semen.
Similar to how consanguineal semen withstands the influence of affinal others, vegetal salt allows users
to resist the all-destructive predatory capacity of tobacco. In other words, vegetal salt facilitates the
familiarization, or perhaps more precisely, the “agnatization” of tobacco.
To be sure, Echeverri and Román-Jitdutjaaño’s assertion of an analogy between vegetal salt and semen
is situated within a larger argument, where the preparation of vegetal salt epitomizes the Murui-Muina’s
perspectives on the preparation procedures of their main substances—manioc, tobacco, coca, and salt—
as a means of purifying elements from their immoral and anti-social valences. Such decontamination is
deemed necessary to convert these elements into beneficial substances contributing to human
reproduction. Salt plants and other nonhuman elements encapsulate diseases and negative thoughts and
emotions that the Creator once rejected from his body, and burning and filtering them enable people to
rid them of these impurities, converting them, in the case of salt plants, into vegetal salt, which fosters
human well-being and produces truly human bodies (Echeverri 2001; idem 2002; Echeverri and RománJitdutjaaño 2013). Based on my observations concerning Andoque salt (and yarumo preparation, as

197

elaborated in the next section) and relevant myth narratives, it becomes evident that these moral
teachings warrant consideration within the context of a predatory cosmos. Here, copulation is a way of
preying on others, constituting part of more englobing schemes of mastery and familiarization.
Therefore, the addition of vegetal salt to the Andoque’s (and the People of the Center’s) tobacco paste is
a further element reflecting the greater agnatic control and asymmetry that they strive to achieve in
marital exchange compared to the peoples of the Vaupés-Apaporis, who consume tobacco in the
unadulterated forms or cigars or snuff, and where efforts are made to balance this exchange (Descola
1998; 2013, 345–52; S. Hugh-Jones 1993). This may also explain why the Andoque tolerate the
consumption of tobacco paste by women, which contains more salt than the one ideally consumed by
men, while disapproving of their coca consumption. Some elders even cheerfully told me about their
granddaughters’—and not grandsons’—taste for this substance, reflecting a more active encouragement.
This tolerance or encouragement may be a means to imbue dispositions favorable to men’s patriline
among their wives and female descendants. In this regard, tobacco paste is indeed diametrically opposed
to manioc derivatives, especially manicuera, as it is a substance produced by men and consumed by
everyone, allowing the male producers to influence the subjectivities of female consumers as well.
It is noteworthy that while M14 and M15 associate tobacco with affines from downriver—namely fish
and anacondas—M16 more readily links its potency to the ocelot stars above, and M3 recounts its
arrival from upriver, alongside the maloca and all the other cultivars brought by Egret of the River
Source. In the latter myth, tobacco is depicted as yet another element from upriver appropriated by the
center in a dialectical process of familiarization where Egret of the River Source takes hold of the center
and ultimately identifies himself with it. This double spatial origin is symptomatic of the multivalence of
tobacco for the Andoque. The familiarization of tobacco in Andoque mythology operates differently
than the mutual exclusivity presented in the Bora myth summarized above, where the old, jaguar
tobacco is eradicated with the emergence of the new tobacco, which is the hero’s son. In contrast, the
Andoque tobacco myths reflect the coexistence of multiple layers, allowing the plant’s users to draw,
according to context, both on the power of the consanguineous father or captain and the power of affinal
relatives. In the next section, after examining the capabilities with which coca endows its consumers, we
will observe the specific version of appropriation by agnatization undergone by this plant.

198

Coca
On everyday occasions during my fieldwork, the Andoque talked considerably more about coca than
about tobacco, depicting coca as more central to their existence as true human beings, and as a substance
which endows them with knowledge and access to power on a more daily basis. However, tobacco
maintains its privileged position in ritual dances. Whereas coca is prepared and consumed in large
amounts in dances and is offered to the spirits along with the other substances, it does not have a specific
role like tobacco paste in the protocols of ritual exchange between host and guest, and between humans
and nonhumans. In this section, I show that the core capability that coca provides its producers and
consumers is the maintenance of true human thinking. This theme recurs among the People of the Center
(e.g. Griffiths 2001; Londoño Sulkin 2005; Echeverri 2015). The proper preparation and consumption of
coca are among the defining traits that distinguish true humans from animals, who lack true coca,
tobacco, manioc, cultivated fruits, malocas or language. By analyzing the Andoque coca myths, I link
this theme to sexual self-restraint, a prevalent motif in regional coca mythology. This examination
demonstrates how the notion of “true humanity” is connected to resisting the familiarizing and diverting
influences of both human and nonhuman affines—including Whites—thereby safeguarding one’s center.
In M2, Erythroxylum coca var. ipadu is termed hí’píe, which people translate as “moaning and alive”
(hií: “to moan”; pḭ́ : alive), alluding to the father who continued to live through the plant and whose sighs
became the sound that the plant made when budding. However, this name, like other names for the plant
in Northwest Amazonia, is a derivative of the Tupi name for the plant, ipadu. This serves as one of the
evidence which Echeverri and Pereira mobilize to argue for the relatively recent arrival of coca to the
Colombian Amazon and the commencement of its cultivation in that region, no sooner than the 1820s
(2005, 132). During that period, the People of the Center’s growing exchange with non-Indigenous
people along the main rivers introduced them to chickens and dolphins, which inhabit these large
rivers—two animals that also bear similar names with common Tupi or Quichua roots in all the region’s
languages (ibid, 132–33). The terminus post quem of 1820 is justified based on the absence of this plant
and of its rich, easily perceptible culture in the writings of von Spix and von Martius, who visited the
region between 1817 and 1820, with the earliest reference to coca culture by Thomas Whiffen, who
visited the area in 1908–1909 (ibid, 135–36). The authors propose that the Bolivian species descended
from the Andes to the Upper Amazon in the eighteenth century and became established in the Caquetá
River and Northwest Amazonia during the nineteenth century, where it received a mode of preparation

199

and consumption that distinguishes it from Andean coca culture (ibid, 137–38). However, von Martius
did report seeing coca plants for the first time and their preparation in the Northwest Amazonian style
close to Tefe, where the Caquetá/Japurá River converges with the Amazon/Solimões (von Spix and von
Martius 1981, 182). Furthermore, he explicitly mentions the use of coca powder by the people living
along the Caquetá (whom he collectively termed “Miranhas”; Echeverri and Pereira 2005, 135), stating:
“I had the opportunity to see on the Japurá how a chief of a group of Miranhas, who was about to
embark on a prolonged expedition, provides each of his companions with a regular dose of this powder,
using a spoon made of manatee bone, to ensure them against fatigue” (von Spix and von Martius 1981,
183; my translation).64
Nevertheless, von Martius’ hypothesis that coca arrived in the Amazon from Peru suggests a certain
degree of foreignness that this substance presented during that period as well, and thus, based on
Echeverri and Pereira’s linguistic evidence I assume that the plant entered the region, and that the
contemporary mode of coca preparation and consumption became common there relatively shortly
before von Martius and von Spix’s visit. In any case, and unlike the other elements examined in this
chapter and the preceding one and attributed to Egret of the River Source, coca’s arrival from an area
associated with the river source is a historical fact.
Much like among other peoples in Northwest Amazonia, coca is ingested in the form of a powder called
mambe in local Spanish. Among the Andoque, this coca is known as ma̰ ̰ó sé, a term that alludes to eating
a powdered substance. Coca consumption and preparation are activities exclusively undertaken by men.
They insert ample quantities of coca powder into the inner sides of their cheeks, where it remains for
hours, gradually absorbing into their saliva as the powder dissolves slowly. Men consume significant
amounts of coca daily: during various daytime tasks, while preparing mambe in the afternoon and
evening, or when joining others in mambeadero sessions. Moreover, they use it to stay awake during
nighttime fishing or hunting activities.
Many men prepare mambe daily, in the afternoon and evening, while others prepare it once in two or
three days. Mambe cannot be prepared offhandedly; its preparation process adheres to a series of

64
It is also worth noting that Echeverri and Pereira cite a list of daily tasks performed in that region and published by von
Martius and von Spix, which does not include coca preparation, as evidence for the absence of coca culture in the region
during that period (Echeverri and Pereira 2005, 135). However, it is important to consider that this list only concerns
women’s tasks (von Spix and von Martius 1981, 234). If anything, the absence of coca preparation from this list shows that it
was performed exclusively by men back then, as it is today.

200

meticulous rules. Adherence to these rules signifies the preparer’s reverence for the coca spirit, which, in
turn, bestows greater access to knowledge and power. The coca leaves are attentively handpicked to
prevent damaging the buds, and during this process the garden owner also removes unwanted weeds,
otherwise the plant stops growing, thinking that its owner no longer loves it. Upon returning from the
garden, people search for yarumo leaves in secondary forests. These leaves’ ashes are mixed with the
coca powder to shield it from moisture and temper the potency of the plant’s alkaloids, enabling their
absorption. Upon arriving home, the coca leaves are toasted and then ground into a fine powder using a
mortar. Subsequently, this powder is combined with the yarumo ashes and sieved through a delicate
cloth until an ultra-fine consistency is achieved. Typically, the entire process takes place on the same
day, and some people claim that the spirits of the coca or yarumo leaves disperse if these elements are
left overnight without undergoing full processing. The instruments used today for the process represent a
mix of local craft and industrial manufacture. On the one hand, coca leaves are gathered in traditionally
woven baskets, and the mortar and pestle are made from the granadillo tree (Brosimum rubescens Taub.)
in a process that is subject to many rules. On the other hand, the leaves are toasted upon big tin plates
crafted from repurposed gasoline barrels, and the powder is sieved into emptied, used gasoline tanks.
The preparation of coca by one or more men signals the commencement of the nocturnal mambeadero
session. As the hours pass, the conversation transitions from basic updates on the day’s events to
ritualized discussions about cures, defenses, and even myth narrations. At intervals, those engaged in
coca preparation invite each mambeador to take a spoonful of the powder, while others, including
participants, may offer tobacco paste or even cigarettes.
People say that before the rubber upheaval, every captain had his team of coqueros responsible for coca
preparation. These individuals were tasked with different phases of the process. In return for the coca
they provided to their captain, he would reciprocate by sharing words in the form of myth narrations and
other teachings. This reciprocal exchange continues during initiation processes, where young initiates
offer their instructors mambe and tobacco paste in exchange for knowledge. The hierarchical dimension
of coca preparation persists to this day in the expectation that young people, especially visitors from
another maloca, would grind the coca leaves of senior men, as well as in the custom of serving the first
spoon of coca to the eldest person present, justified through the notion of “removing the coca’s grey
hair,” i.e., to prevent younger mambeadores from aging too quickly. Mambeadero participants cannot

201

depart as they please. Instead, the maloquero or the eldest man present disperses participants, holding
the privilege to conclude the verbal exchange.
What abilities and powers does coca confer upon its consumers? Much like tobacco, coca serves as a
tool for communication among human beings and with nonhuman entities for diverse purposes, from
visiting sites with powerful guardian spirits and obtaining game, through healing and learning myths and
ritual procedures, to sorcery. The coca plant is believed to possess a spirit, and establishing a connection
with this spirit is crucial for accessing its knowledge and powers. The owner-person of the coca, referred
to as “the coca spirit” (hí’píe tne’túi), is believed to embody the plant. It is regarded as the spirit of the
father who passed away and was reborn in the form of the plant, indirectly caring for his children (see
M2). Taking care of the plant, preparing the powder diligently, and consuming it with respect enables
individuals to establish a personal connection with its owner-person. This connection results in insights
into forthcoming events, as well as instructions and additional assistance.
Similar to the warnings and instructions that the orphans received in M2, tne’túi is a spirit originating
from Sı̰ ́di, the leader of jaguars embodying the carnivorous principle in the world, who possess
foreknowledge of impending death and other future events, as most occurrences can be mapped onto the
relational dynamics of predation (see next chapter). The advice of coca, alongside that of tobacco, can
be imparted to certain individuals during their waking hours, but is more commonly received during
sleep. Dreams, which will be explored further in the upcoming chapter, are experienced by everyone,
but many of them are deemed imprecise and even deceptive, while dreams incited by the coca spirit in
adult men—since they are the exclusive consumers of this substance—are portrayed as brief and precise.
A mambeador can also invoke dreams on specific subjects by deliberately contemplating those subjects
during his waking moments. Yet, the induction of dreams by the coca spirit is tied to a less favorable
inclination it possesses: incessantly posing queries to those who partake in its consumption, particularly
concerning myths and other topics discussed while using coca, thereby preventing them from sleeping
peacefully. Mambeadores risk remaining tired the following day, thereby impairing their ability to
provide sustenance for themselves and their families, and thus growing weak, sick, and eventually
becoming feeble, ailing, and prematurely aged in both appearance and vigor while still young. The
coca’s owner-person is demanding, and within an animistic account of addiction, it is said that it wants
to be consumed in greater quantities and frequency to better engage with the myths it has grown
accustomed to. Additionally, this owner-person has an irritable and indolent aspect that can cause its

202

consumer to wake up late and express discontent in the morning, and so it is recommended to vomit
after consuming large amounts of coca, to get rid of those negative aspects and remain only with its
teachings. However, when people criticize others, they would limit the influence of the coca spirit.
Reflecting on the origin of violent actions and erratic utterances by another individual, an elder once
conveyed to me, “Who taught him these things? The coca spirit itself doesn’t teach you anything, you
always learn it from someone.”
The relationship with the coca’s owner-person, along with coca consumption in general, plays a pivotal
role in sociability and the expression of cogent speech. I have never observed people shouting or
expressing anger at the mambeadero. Even in households where family members used to engage in daily
conflicts, the mambeadero remained a “demilitarized zone.” Furthermore, commitments made at the
mambeadero hold greater significance than those made elsewhere, and statements uttered while
consuming coca carry more weight and are treated as having a heightened truth value, reflecting
individuals’ authentic positions and beliefs. “An Indian without mambe says only lies (puras mentiras),”
commented an interlocutor in reference to a person who only rarely consumed coca and thus could not
be relied upon. This belief rests on the notion that the coca spirit is invoked and is present during
conversations held with mouthfuls of coca. To lie in such a circumstance is seen as a betrayal of the
spirit, and any thought or utterance influenced by coca has the potential to alter an individual’s
relationship with it.
Each person establishes a distinct connection with the coca spirit, and a person’s thoughts and actions
are believed to shape his relationship with this owner-person, which is reflected in the quality and
quantity of coca they possess. The quality of coca (and tobacco paste) produced by an individual who
narrates “ugly” (feo) myths about animals and employs his coca for malevolent practices will change to
“ugly mambe,” suitable only for such purposes. Animals are said to consume coca at the mambeadero of
such a person, bringing along their undesirable traits such as idleness, envy, and anger that can attach
themselves to those consuming coca in that space. As will be explored in Chapter 13, the practice of
coca powder sale is thought to endanger people’s rapport with the coca’s owner-person because the
grower cannot control the thoughts and deeds of the powder’s consumers in the city—whether they are
Indigenous or not—and so the owner-person may become displeased with the outcome, resulting in the
drying up of the plant and its eventual death.

203

People infer on the strength of the connection of others to that spirit by observing how they grow the
plant, how they prepare the powder, and the quantity and quality of coca that they possess. Upon
meeting others, men usually exchange their coca jars in an act of conviviality that also allows them to
know if the coca spirit backs the actions of their interlocutor, and if, as a result, they should fear and
respect them.
Since the coca powder contains the thoughts and intentions of the person who has grown and prepared it,
sharing mambe with others serves to form and transform their bodies and subjectivities. On the one
hand, as we will see in Chapter 9, people can bewitch others by giving them coca that they name after
some animal or a poor mythical figure, thereby rendering them consanguineous with that animal or with
the owner-person of the myth and transforming their behavior or certain physical aspects for the worse
into those of the animal or figure in question. By contrast, initiation to healing, sorcery and other ritual
functions, or the teaching of mythology, involves the daily preparation of coca powder and tobacco
paste by the initiate for consumption by himself and the tutor. The tutor blesses these substances by
invoking the owner-persons of the cures, spells, songs, ceremonies, or myths he wishes to teach the
initiate, and by consuming these substances with him, he transforms his subjectivity, inculcating this
knowledge in his body.
Initiation into coca consumption is ideally conducted in a similar manner, where the young
mambeador’s father or another elder invokes one of coca’s origin stories while presenting the first coca
spoon to the initiate. The intention behind this procedure is to bestow upon the young mambeador the
capabilities enshrined in that specific narrative. Nevertheless, as Londoño (2012, 104–6) notes for the
Féénemɨna, it was common to hear many men comment that they had started consuming coca without
such proper initiation, “just like that” (así no más), or after clandestinely taking it from their fathers. One
man told me that this was the reason he could not fall asleep after consuming coca, thereby alluding to
the belief documented in M1, which asserts that an individual’s behavior and thoughts during the initial
phase of coca consumption solidify into enduring habits and personality traits. It is also said that those
who commence coca consumption “just like that” can become yellow and thin, harboring earthworms in
their stomachs, as the first coca was an earthworm, according to that myth.
The two coca origin myths that we have encountered offer different capabilities to coca consumers. M1
is referred to as the origin story of coca for healers and sorcerers, as it bestows upon people the ability to
understand animal behavioral particularities and to consume coca with persons of different species, two

204

capabilities which are vital for the communication with animals and their spirits that these practices
require. M2, on the other hand, is the origin story of coca for wisemen in general, as it narrates the
transmission of ancestral knowledge in the absence of flesh-and-blood instructors and the direct
reception of information from Sı̰ ́di (see next chapter). A third origin story exists, related more
specifically to the concepts of center, real humanity, and real captaincy. It recounts that the coca was
initially a towering tree with five branches. Four branches extended to the east, west, north, and south,
imparting knowledge of sorcery, healing, the utilization of aromatic herbs in witchcraft, and the art of
transforming into jaguars to the populations in those regions. Meanwhile, the fifth branch, situated at the
center, remained reserved for the Andoque people, along with an aromatic herb designated for the
rightful leader’s use. This coca story is shared to impart defensive strategies for personal and collective
well-being, as well as the accurate approach to preparing ceremonial dances and conducting activities
for the betterment of humanity.
This brings us to the importance of coca consumption and being truly human. Ongoing and proper coca
consumption and preparation are considered to endow men with proper human thinking. Once, an elder
told me that the previous night he had gone fishing and had lost his way in the river, a clear indication
that a diablo—a forest or riverine spirit—had been after him, trying to confuse him to harm and devour
him. “So I asked myself: How is it possible that someone will change my thinking, when I am ‘wellmambeated’ (cuando estoy bien mambeado)? I am human (soy gente), I consume coca, I speak. I am not
an animal, I am human.” As we will see in the Chapter 9, a person who does not think and behave like a
human being, operates in such a way because he has already been familiarized by animals and their
spirits: this person has been spiritually devoured by the animals and their spirits, and it is only a matter
of time before their body will follow suit and they will fall ill, die, and be physically taken by these
malevolent beings. By fostering human thinking, sociability and moral behavior, coca consumption
protects people from falling prey to animals and their owner-persons.
Although, as we have seen above, coca is important for speech, I received from my interlocutors the
impression that its primary role for people nowadays is fostering true human thinking, rather than
engendering words and facilitating their exchange, as among neighboring peoples. Among the Miraña,
this production of words by coca, which is likened to semen, from men’s mouth, which is likened to a
vagina, is related to exchange with nonhumans. These words are then transacted with the masters of
animals, facilitating access to the game these beings engender (Karadimas 2000a, 453). Among the

205

Murui-Muina (where Karadimas’ model for the Miraña is largely endorsed, see García 2018, 428–30),
the production of words is related to exchange between consanguines and affines, explaining why their
mambeaderos are located between the maloca’s female and male areas (ibid, 425, 430–31). However,
for the Andoque, coca’s capability for maintaining true human thinking is inextricably linked to a crucial
emphasis they introduce to the notion of exchange: ensuring a beneficial asymmetry in it, or, in other
words, dominating it by encompassing it within agnatic identity.
In Miraña and Murui-Muina mythologies, the coca plant is a woman, and the hero obtains her from her
father-in-law, who initiates him into coca preparation. In those myths, the hero’s ability to control his
sexual desire determines the quality of coca he prepares (Echeverri and Pereira 2005, 141–49; García,
412–21; Karadimas 2005, 129–42; for the Bora variant, see Lucas 2019, 93–95). However, in Andoque
mythology, coca is associated with male figures: in M1, it is the transformed earthworm suitor of Lady
Sun, and in M2, it is the transformed father, Egret of the Center. Furthermore, the Andoque myths
highlight the complete incompatibility between women and coca. In M1, the coca is deliberately
dissociated from any connection with women, and the heroine relinquishes the plant to men after they
disgrace her using a distinctively feminine trait—namely, menstrual blood. To be even more explicit,
M1 asserts that the heroine places a curse on men, warning that if they allow themselves to be distracted
by women, coca will lead to their downfall. In M2, the creation of beneficial, knowledge-providing coca
arises from the husband’s refusal to comply with his wife’s demands and the latter’s predatory attitudes
toward him, reflected in her anger and refusal to feed him.
The dissociation between coca and women in these myths is also expressed through the themes of sexual
transgression and self-constraint. The phallic earthworm’s vampiric feeding on the girl’s leg in M1 is a
clear allusion to sexual relations, and in other contexts, it is counted among Tatoañei’s sons who
descend to the center from upriver to court Shadow Egg’s daughters. In depicting coca as masculine and
as the product of sexual transgression, M1 resembles myths from the Apaporis River, where coca
embodies the transformed hero’s brother following his sexual involvement with his sister-in-law, either
consensual or not (von Hildebrand 1979, 436–39; S. Hugh-Jones 1979, 297; Kabiyari et al. 1989, 92–93;
among the Yucuna the brother dies without having sex with his sister-in-law, see van der Hammen 1992,
154–57). Closer to home, among the Miraña and Murui-Muina, the transgressing brother or suitor exists,
but does not transform into the coca plant (García 2018, 413; Karadimas 2005, 136–37). It seems that

206

for the Andoque, the transformation of the transgressor is crucial for underscoring a theme common to
the coca myths of the People of the Center—namely, sexual self-restraint.
This theme is emphasized in M1 through the unfavorable consequence of the transgression: female
control over the coca plant. The male figure’s lack of restraint reflects the control that women exert on
him through his desires, inevitably leading to a woman’s command over the plant into which she
transforms him. Her identification as Lady Sun, Shadow Egg’s daughter, clarifies why men labor for
her—they are her suitors, tested by Shadow Egg in various myths. Yet, Shadow Egg himself is absent
from this narrative. Before the men reclaim the coca through deception, one man nearly acquires it
legitimately through his proficiency in preparing coca powder, particularly his capacity to perceive and
collect yarumo leaves. The parallel between this episode and the myth narrating the origin of salt (M13,
which likely predates it, considering tobacco’s more ancient tradition) is significant, warranting a short
digression to discuss yarumo.
As a bright substance added to temper and absorb the alkaloids of a darker substance, yarumo ashes
mixed with coca have a clear parallel with vegetal salt added to tobacco. Yarumo, like salt plants, is wild
and not cultivated by humans. The discipline required for preparing its ashes is similarly bound to sexual
conduct, focusing on prohibitions such as not urinating or avoiding contact with the penis. Similar to the
stricter sexual protocols surrounding vegetal salt, adhering to these restrictions demonstrates one’s
mastery over sexual impulses, or, in other words, over one’s semen. Echeverri and Karadimas noted the
association between yarumo ashes and semen among the People of the Center (Echeverri 2015, 94;
Karadimas 2000a, 448), a connection exemplified in the Andoque’s yarumo gathering episode in M1,
which follows the precedent of M13. This interrelation of semen, salt, and yarumo explains the
otherwise peculiar reference to Shadow Egg’s daughter as “Lady Sun,” suggesting she is related to the
mythical predator and father-in-law, who is Shadow Egg’s antithesis. This nomenclature arises from the
perception of salt as the equivalent of semen that enables the suitors of Sun’s daughter to withstand her
father’s destructive fire (see M17, in Appendix 1). Thus, the heroine is named Lady Sun to signify the
link between semen and the substance she aims to hide. Egret (almost) retrieves the coca by exhibiting
mastery over his sexual urges. In parallel to tobacco’s “agnatization” through vegetal salt, skillfully
prepared yarumo ashes facilitate the “agnatization” of coca, channeling its power for the benefit of one’s
patriclan.

207

The woman in M1 has the cautionary role of warning men against succumbing to temptation and
distraction by women. In a patrilineal and patrilocal clan society like the Andoque’s, being distracted by
women—whether they are one’s real or potential wife, one’s mother pertaining to a different clan from
one’s own, or one’s sister who will marry into another clan—is metonymic for being diverted by one’s
real or potential affines.65 Thus, the Andoque do not view coca as a link to the affinal world or a
facilitator of communication with it; rather, they see it as a defense against predation by real or potential
affines. Its purpose is to safeguard them from the risk of ceasing to exist as real humans— understood
both as human beings and as members of their respective clans. This illuminates why Egret, who
symbolizes captaincy, is the suitor nearest to legitimately retrieving coca from Lady Sun: the captain
ideally represents agnatic continuity and the resistance of the center against perilous temptations by
human and nonhuman affines. The trickery by which the animals undermine Egret’s success also
explains why, despite containing an egret figure, this story is currently known as “Coca of the Animals,”
instead of “Coca for Captaincy” like M2.
This might also clarify why, even though both tobacco and coca were off-limits for women and children
in the early twentieth century, only coca remains prohibited today. While tobacco paste is shared with
women as a familiarizing agent, coca is consumed exclusively by men, serving as a means for them to
distinguish themselves from women and the cosmo-social reality that they represent.66 This rationale
could also illuminate why, unlike the Miraña (Karadimas 2000a, 444), even post-menopausal Andoque
women do not partake in coca consumption. It is as if the female trait that conflicts with coca
consumption is not fertility, which a woman loses at that stage, but her inherent affinal nature, which she
can never disavow.
The view of coca as a consanguineous, largely anti-affinal substance is enshrined in M2. Drawing a
comparison with a similar Miraña myth, “the Myth of Second Creation,” as documented by Karadimas
(2005, 236–48) is enlightening. In the latter myth, after the Creator fashions garden cultivars and
humans, people continuously communicate with him and provide him with offerings. However, as they
become more critical of him, he refuses these offerings, saying that he is not hungry, until one day he

65
We can safely assume that the woman is metonymical to her blood relatives also in M13, as well as in the potentially
dangerous “woman’s word” (Chapter 5). Gender is thus differently associated with kinship among the Andoque than among
the uxorilocal Achuar, for whom women are associated with consanguinity, and men with affinity (Descola 2001, 98).
66
For women’s exclusion from coca and tobacco production and consumption in the region in the early twentieth century see
also Whiffen 1915, 68, 144. However, it is difficult to determine from this author if this observation specifically applies to
the Andoque as well.

208

vanishes. His two sons are then left alone at the maloca until one day they recall their father (the
Creator) and renew the offerings. Subsequently, the father guides them in recreating a new garden. Two
distinctions between this Miraña myth and M2 are especially pertinent here. First, the former does not
attribute the father’s disappearance to his wife’s refusal to feed him; instead, it faults people of both
sexes for this vanishing.67 Second, the Miraña variant does not claim that the coca plant (or tobacco) was
created from the vanished father’s body. The Andoque stand out by portraying coca as an agnatic agent
that largely contradicts an affinal principle. In other words, they perceive coca as a defensive tool for
men against the affinal world, where women, relatives by marriage, and, ultimately, spirits and animals,
strive to ensnare men through familiarization, diverting them from their respective centers.
Interestingly, M2 acknowledges the significance of affinal relatives. It is the younger brother, often
linked with affinal Others in Andoque thinking and ritual life, who recognizes the coca plant as the
father, not the elder brother, whose stationary position symbolizes firstborns’ connection with agnatic
continuity (see Chapter 11). This realization comes after he consumes the manicuera leftovers made by
the mother, who belongs to a different clan in a patrilineal society. In the version narrated by members
of the Sun Clan, the mother, who does not die, facilitates the coca plant’s transfer from the father to the
(one) son at the former’s demand. Thus, while women and affines are generally marginalized in these
myths, their mediation appears essential for connecting with Sḭ́ di, linked to ancestry and depicted as the
deceased father, and for accessing his teachings. Hence, the father represents the goal while the mother
serves as the means to achieve it. Andoque coca myths thus seem to reinforce a theme common to the
People of the Center’s views on coca and sexual restraint: affinal exchanges are encompassed by agnatic
identity, not vice versa.
Adhering to the patriclan’s traditions is crucial for maintaining true human thinking, vital for engaging
in advantageous exchanges with others. While the previously mentioned anthropologists of neighboring
peoples (notably Karadimas and García) primarily focus on exchanges with nonhuman entities and
Indigenous affines, the timing of the People of the Center’s adoption of coca—during their increased
trade with Whites—also prompts a consideration of coca’s significance in the context of these
exchanges. We may recall that in M5 (see Appendix 1), Egret of the Center gains an advantage over
67
Furthermore, it could be argued that the Miraña myth attributes greater responsibility for this disappearance to men rather
than women. Unlike men, women do not criticize the Creator. This is why he persists in accepting women’s offerings of
casabe and manicuera while declining men’s offerings of coca and tobacco. Only when men begin to suspect that the Creator
favors women’s offerings over men’s due to his romantic involvement with them, does the Creator cease accepting casabe
and manicuera offerings as well (Karadimas 2005b, 239).

209

Egret of the River Mouth because while the latter offers the former two substances—cigarettes and
liquor—the former provides three—tobacco paste, manicuera, and coca powder. As narrated to me by
Fisi, the myth draws parallels between manicuera and Egret of the River Mouth’s liquor, referred to as
“axe-manicuera” (pɵɵkó’koa), and between cigarettes and tobacco paste, with Egret of the Center’s
words being “it is tobacco, just like yours.” Given these parallels, we are left with the impression that
the “surplus” substance allowing the “word” of Egret of the Center to “proceed” (huha) beyond that of
his opponent was coca, for which the latter had no equivalent counterpart. As stated in Part I, the
Andoque view the river source, with which coca is associated, as a protective force against dangers from
the river mouth, which is connected with Whites. While my interlocutors did not explicitly draw this
association considering the perceived predation by Whites and territory owner-persons due to extractive
operations within the colonial economy—themes to be explored in Part IV—I suggest that coca is also
crucial in managing these exchanges. The critical issue is not the participation in exchange per se but
benefitting from it and mitigating its risks by adhering to one’s human center.
Coca and tobacco thus share many similarities, particularly the power they confer to familiarize others,
in a range of contexts spanning healing, initiation, and sorcery. This familiarization has both predatory
and defensive aspects. However, the two substances differ in the nuances they emphasize in this process:
tobacco is imbued with stronger predatory connotations, while coca is seen as more defensive. The
familiarization associated with these substances is, in fact, double-staged, as the influence on the human
or nonhuman recipient hinges on the subjugation of both the plant and its owner-person to the will of the
giver, a dynamic which is both encoded in mythology and reenacted during the preparation process.
These measures can be seen as additional ways in which these potent plants, originating from the affinal
outside, are agnatized, so that their derivatives reinforce the words and deeds of their producer, rather
than external intentions, such as those of the plants’ original owner-persons, conveying results beneficial
for the producer and his clan and aligned with his origin. A similar ideal appears in relation to manioc
and its derivatives, where, as previously discussed, there is an expectation within the clan receiving the
wife that she produces derivatives that benefit her new clan, rather than her clan of origin. With all three
cultivars, the act of sharing that activates their efficacy involves a gift logic, where a part of the
producer-donor passes to and affects the consumer-recipient. This metonymic dimension is underpinned
by the heterosubstitutive idea that humans can be replaced by the substances they produce and offer to
others. In certain contexts, which will be detailed in Part III, these offerings can be used to successfully
prey upon others in a homosubstitutive fashion. Therefore, the interplay between these two logics of
210

substitution underscores the dialectics of gift-giving and predation in Andoque cosmo-social
interactions.
However, before we delve into the discussion on predation, to fully understand how the river source and
its associated elements are familiarized and mastered by the people living in the center to magnify the
latter, the next chapter will explore the auxiliary spirit, tne’túi, to which tobacco and coca give access.
We will examine how gaining this access represents the relationship of mastery with Sı̰ ́di, who imparts
this spirit.

211

212

Chapter 7. Tne’túi: Power as Spirit
The discussion in previous chapters regarding the maloca and the substances obtained from the river
source, which grant the center access to spiritual power for thinking and acting, would remain
incomplete without an exploration of this spiritual power: tne’túi. Tellingly, it is this term, which I
translate as “auxiliary spirit,” that my male interlocutors have chosen to render the Spanish word poder,
“power.” In this chapter, I present the association between tne’túi and the river source, as this spirit is
imparted by Sḭ́ di, the carnivorous god from upriver. By examining the relationship between tne’túi and
yono̰píi, the tutelary spirit, I show how people gain access to the auxiliary spirit by familiarizing Sḭ́ di,
thereby harnessing his capabilities and knowledge to their own use. The interplay between the auxiliary
spirit and the tutelary spirit represents another manifestation of the center’ establishment of mastery
relations with the potent agents from the river source. Finally, through the analysis of Andoque dream
and omen theories, I discuss the nature of this spiritual power and its operation.
The Soul, Auxiliary and Tutelary Spirits
Tne’túi and yono̰pii are two of the three invisible components of the person, according to the Andoque
conception. To better understand them, I will discuss them after presenting the third invisible
component—namely, mo̰no̰i, or “soul.” Mo̰no̰i encompasses the superficial traits of the person, their
habits and character that can be discerned from the outside—just like the face, mono. Albeit possessed
by all human and nonhuman beings, the mo̰no̰i works differently among each class of beings, depending
on its physicality. Under normal conditions, the mo̰no̰i’s mental, perceptual, and emotional states and
faculties, and those expressed through the root mo̰no̰ (e.g., listening [ɵaɵmo̰no̰toáa̋ñe], understanding
[domó̰no̰ḛ], being attentive [ḭmo̰no̰ḛñe], feeling drunk [yimo̰no̰] and becoming disheartened [yómo̰no̰]),
are experienced in accordance with one’s physical body, the substances one consumes and the people
with whom one consumes them, thereby allowing the smooth functioning of the kinship network. The
mo̰no̰i therefore mediates the passage between the person’s subjectivity and physicality. Although it
normally stays within the body, some three days before a person dies, the mo̰no̰i can produce a specter
or double called ḭtámo̰no̰i (literally, “soul without someone”) that, being a bodiless lookalike in the form
of the person, wanders around, making the imminent death known. Mo̰no̰i can also be translated as
“consciousness,” because it grants the ability to discern people and things for whom and what they are,
thereby enabling the judgement which is crucial for functioning in everyday life. The mo̰no̰i is the
passive, most vulnerable component of the person, and as such can be harmed or devoured by others.

213

The function of the mo̰no̰i can also be compromised or altered by external agents, leading to behaviors
spanning from foolish and incomprehensible actions to violent actions against kin —like the false yo’fi
whom jaguars endowed with “enemy consciousness” (yó’őmo̰no̰i), making him perceive his people as
prey (M16). When such transformations occur in the forest, the victim identifies themselves as an
animal (ḭsu otimo̰no̰i, “animal-transformed soul”) and remains there, leading a bodiless, invisible
existence, a situation referred to in Spanish as encantarse (“to be enchanted”).
Upon death, the mo̰no̰i goes either to the origin site of the deceased’s clan or to the owner-person of the
animals. Some people further explain that this depends on the form of death: the mo̰no̰i of people
suffering violent death—like most deaths are in local thinking (Karadimas 1999)—from diseases or
accidents sent by the animals and their owner-persons, or by sorcerers who manipulate these spirits—
goes to live at the origin site of the animals and spirits responsible for their death. By contrast, the souls
of the few people who manage to defend themselves from such assaults reach the origin site of their
clan, where they remain alive. After a person dies, their mo̰no̰i can appear to their living relatives as a
specter, ká’hoi (which also means “image” or “shadow”) around the burial site or the places that the
deceased used to frequent while alive, attempting to perpetuate and deepen the living’s grief over the
loss, confuse their senses, and, ultimately, seduce them into joining them.
Besides mo̰no̰i, human and nonhuman beings also possess yono̰píi (possible meaning: “sprout of
remedy”). Similar to a propagule that grows from the place where it has been planted, the yono̰píi is
rooted in the heart, serving as the source that activates and commands various organs. It generates
thoughts, articulates speech, enables the planning of actions, and facilitates the experience of dreams.
This mental faculty possesses a somewhat substantive existence, as it is said to travel when its possessor
thinks or dreams on people or places located far away. This carries the risk that, when projected over a
great distance, the yono̰píi could be detected and targeted by malevolent spirits. A person’s yono̰píi
cannot be in more than one place at the same time. Consequently, people avoid hunting during
community assemblies or ceremonial dances, times when the elders’ yono̰píi is not focused on the forest
and the pacification of its potentially harmful nonhuman dwellers, and those venturing there are exposed
to the latter’s aggressions.
Given that all the objects in the world are either persons and/or are cared for by persons (“ownerpersons”), thinking about any person or thing always summons their spirits or the spirits of the persons
guarding them. This amounts to a dialogue with these beings. Therefore, thinking necessitates

214

knowledge of the origin stories of these diverse objects of thought, as well as the names of their ownerpersons. This body of knowledge is sometimes referred to in Spanish as ley de origen (“the Law of
Origin”), and in Andoque as katakádɨñḛ́ nḭe ɵ́ḛ́kńḭ́ sofa—“that which the word of the beginning says.”
What this word communicates, in this context, is the codes of proper conduct between the territory’s
human and nonhuman co-dwellers. Since the names of owner-persons are expressed in the native
language, the content of this law varies from one Indigenous territory to another, contributing to the
perceived distinctiveness of these territories from each other. Hence, people explain that true thinking,
which enables healing, sorcery, and the negotiations with the owner-persons of the territory that are
essential for hunting, farming, and overall well-being, is only possible within one’s own territory. Only
within this domain is one familiar with the origin myths of the different sites and species, along with the
names of the owner-persons in the local language. For the Andoque, such active, engaged thinking is
claimed to be possible within the borders of their ancestral territory and to their segment of the Caquetá
River from the mouth of Spawning River (Ipá̰sé, known as Monochoa) upstream to that of Green River
(Pasḭsé, known as Cahuinarí) downstream. Nevertheless, Andoque members’ thinking can extend further
along the Caquetá, from Córdoba cascade downstream to Angusturas canyon upstream, but in a more
passive manner. In this mode, they can detect dangers approaching their territory and communicate with
the spirits of knowledgeable elders residing in those territories to expand their perception range. While
Andoque members acknowledge that certain Indigenous outsiders living on their territory can heal or
bewitch effectively, they emphasize that due to their foreign origin, they are excluded from engaging in
the deeper communication with spirits necessary for the more fundamental territorial management that
occurs at the mambeadero and during dances.
While possessed by all creatures, the strength of yono̰píi varies among persons. When it is strong, the
yono̰píi serves as a tutelary spirit, safeguarding its owner by alerting them to dangers and enemies, and
providing more vivid, precise dreams. It plays a role in influencing a young man to express willingness
to learn different myth and ritual practices—as elders would not otherwise impose training—and it
dictates their capacity to endure the physical trials of an initiation process, a process that would confer
upon them the possession of this knowledge and the power it entails (see Chapters 9 and 10). The
yono̰píi’s strength is determined by its degree of access to the auxiliary spirit tne’túi, which is endowed
with greater mobility.

215

Tne’túi translates literally to “learning of the heart,” or “learning of the internal organ.” It is linked to the
heart and liver, both referred to as tú (although the heart is colloquially referred to as pḭḭ́ túkn,
“liver/internal organ of life”), as well as to the chest, tútann (“internal organ-bones”). Beyond
encompassing a range of emotional states (such as happiness [hɵ́tutú], sadness [na̰í’hotú], fear [yítuíkő],
and anger [mntú]), the liver and particularly the heart are attributed with more profound mental
processes like having faith, thinking, remembering, and attentiveness—all expressed through the verb
ĩtu. The tne’túi is a faculty characterized by the proficiency, maturity, and collaboration of these four
mental processes. It embodies active thinking that is deeply grounded in understanding one’s own
origins as well as those of myriad entities and beings in one’s environment. Tne’túi is usually translated
in Spanish as conocimiento (knowledge), espíritu (spirit), poder (power), and even brujería (sorcery), as
it empowers the tne’túo—the knowledgeable human and nonhuman agent endowed with it—not only to
protect themselves from other agents, but also to prey on them invisibly, in ways that will be explored in
Chapter 9. Unlike the mo̰no̰i (the soul), a person’s tne’túi remains imperceptible to others unless
intentionally disclosed through assaults, cures, narrations, or ceremonial performances. Unlike the
yono̰píi (the tutelary spirit), it does not truly pertain to the person, which is why I translate it as
“auxiliary spirit.”
The tne’túi stems from Sḭ́ di, the cannibal god, who is associated with the thunder from upriver and is the
head of the jaguars and of the jaguar principle that various entities use for both visible and invisible
predation. This name might be of a foreign origin (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm. 2022), and is part of the
verbal construction sı̰ ́ di onótii: “to do Sı̰ ́di [with someone],” i.e., to devour them. Sı̰ ́di is the youngest
sibling among Lady Beetle of Life’s offspring who inhabit the maloca beneath the Site of Tears. Sı̰ ́di is
also the name of an unidentified bumblebee, a category of insects associated with ocelots (which are
included in the jaguar category) and are considered masculine and carnivorous (Jara 1995, 156;
Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 125). Prior to hunting, one can appeal to Sı̰ ́di by offering coca and tobacco,
requesting his assistance in obtaining his orphans—the animals that this god considers marginal
members of his group and that he can thus discard. Through sorcery, in an act called ḭsiéso—
“(transformation into) a thing of their own (i.e., another person’s game)”—people communicate with
Sı̰ ́di, asking him to devour the victim’s soul (mo̰no̰i), resulting in physical demise shortly afterward.
Therefore, contact with Sı̰ ́di is considered diabólico, reserved for elderly individuals without offspring
linked to any maloca, whereas captains are bound to the life-affirming Egret of the Center. However, as

216

I witnessed on several occasions, even captains invoke Sı̰ ́di for healing purposes, summoning this deity
to devour the pathogenic agents and eradicate illness.
So far, I have mentioned several nonhuman entities whose interaction facilitates the achievement of
different ends. For instance, interaction with Egret of the Center is essential for leadership, while
engagement with Lady Beetle of Life promotes regeneration. Within this cosmology, engaging with Sı̰ ́di
occupies a privileged position. Considering that nearly all deaths result from overt or covert predation,
and non-fatal illnesses, accidents, and conflicts represent incomplete predatory actions, Sı̰ ́di is regarded
as the ultimate agent behind death and afflictions. Furthermore, as the good fortune of one often
corresponds to the misfortune of another, Sı̰ ́di possesses a heightened awareness of events unfolding
throughout the territory well before they materialize. It is revealing that, in Andoque language, the same
verb do expresses both “to know” and “to see.” Sı̰ ́di knows everything because he observes everything
from his elevated vantage point at the river source. Various Andoque myths and other tales recount of
groups that were annihilated, devoured, or transformed into another class of beings, except for one
individual who managed to save themselves by climbing up a tree or onto the top beams of a maloca.
From this vantage point, they witnessed the entire event and could later recount it to others, passing
down the knowledge of such events to today’s people (for example, M19 and M18).
The tne’túi, “learning of the heart,” can be understood as a frequency through which Sı̰ ́di imparts
knowledge to both human and nonhuman beings, transmitting insights about the predatory cosmos to
those attuned to this frequency and enhancing their sensitivity and awareness of the logic governing this
cosmos. People can establish a connection with it in two primary ways: first, by deeply assimilating
mythological wisdom, and second, by consuming coca, tobacco, and the wild varieties of these plants
and other vision-inducing herbs (sita, mḭʼno̰éi, tɒ’di) that are said to not be commonly consumed in the
present. While all beings in the world possess a yono̰píi that communicates, to some extent, with tne’túi,
the potential to intensify this communication through the consumption of specific substances associated
with men or controlled by them elucidates why women are less likely to be considered tne’túɵ—
powerful sages.
As Karadimas (2005, 65–66) observed for the Miraña, this also explains why the tne’túi is registered not
only at the heart, but predominantly at the liver. The liver filters the forces and knowledge of the beings

217

that Sı̰ ́di has transformed into game, before disseminating these elements throughout the body.68 The
strong link between Sı̰ ́di, thoughts and knowledge, and the digestive system is also echoed in the
commonly held idea that consuming various non-Indigenous foodstuffs and substances, particularly
spices, onions, and garlic, renders the body impervious to Sı̰ ́di’s teachings.69
Based on my findings, I propose to view access to the tne’túi as the result of dominating Sı̰ ́di. As
discussed earlier, this domination, which aligns the pet’s capabilities and actions with the master’s
intentions, is achieved through the process of familiarizing predation: the transformation of the
prospective pet into kin, achieved, among other methods, through feeding. The more a man engages in
hunting or bewitching others, the more he provides sustenance to Sı̰ ́di through his prey, thereby further
solidifying his control over him. An illustrative example of this is the cannibal dances prior to the rubber
upheaval, where the consumption of human beings fed Sı̰ ́di, securing control over him and enhancing
access to the tne’túi he imparts (see Chapter 10).70 The outcome of Sı̰ ́di’s familiarization is the
possession of a strong tutelary spirit, yono̰píi, whose horticultural and domesticated connotations are
further buttressed by its synonymous terms ɨpǵánn, containing the word “sprout” (pǵ), and oéna̰, meaning
“my pet.”71 While the tne’túi is primarily associated with the jaguar managed by Sı̰ ́di, and dreaming of a
jaguar companion indicates attunement to this frequency, yono̰píi, appears in dreams as a dog
companion. The tne’túi exists largely outside the body, while yono̰píi is internal to it, akin to a
domesticated version of the wild jaguar that roams the forest, embodying its power and knowledge.72
Equipped with this explanation, we can now revisit the instruction to narrate primarily captaincy and
clan origin stories at the mambeadero, while refraining from the narration of animal stories, which affect
the very essence of the coca and tobacco produced and consumed at that mambeadero, rendering these
substances only suitable for asocial thinking and behavior, as encoded in these stories. Narrating
captaincy and clan origin stories ensures the preferred direction of familiarization and mastery, as it
feeds Sı̰ ́di with messages considered beneficial to the clan and human society, harnessing Sı̰ ́di’s
capabilities to the service of the yono̰pǵi of the narrator and of his fellow mambeadores. On the contrary,

For a similar conception among the Ávila Runa, see Kohn 2007, 8.
This impenetrability also diminishes people’s susceptibility, as potential victims, to Sı̰ ́di-related sorcery, see Chapter 9.
70
Cf. the Murui-Muina case reported by García (2018, 142), wherein the souls of human prisoners consumed in cannibal
dances in the past became their predators’ auxiliary spirits—aigadigei, which parallels tne’túi.
71
For an equivalent Murui-Muina term for “pet” that also refers to the soul, see García 2018, 94 n.58.
72
Among neighboring peoples we find equivalent distinctions between external and internal components of the person, see
García 2018, 139–40; Karadimas 2005b, 70–71; Tessmann 1999, 155.
68
69

218

recounting predatory animal stories, drawn from Sı̰ ́di’s sylvan affinal realm and representing the basis of
power for his nonhuman entities, can result in the mambeadores being assimilated by Sı̰ ́di.
Consequently, their thoughts, actions, as well as their coca and tobacco, become aligned with this deity’s
potent will.
Upon death, the person ceases to receive the tne’túi, and the yono̰píi departs to the origin site of sorcery,
which varies for each class of beings. For the Andoque, this location is Tatoañei, a hill situated at the
headwaters of the Macaw River, near Site of Tears, which is also the name of a predatory mythical
figure (see Chapter 9). It is at Tatoañei that the yono̰píi reunites with Sı̰ ́di, who, being the author of
death, also oversees the covert violence of witchcraft. In contrast with the physical, more concrete
aspects of the deceased encompassed by the mo̰no̰i, which are considered perilous and should be kept at
a distance, the more abstract yono̰píi held by a wise person can be coveted by their living relatives. The
latter can ensure that the deceased’s yono̰píi remains with them, allowing an adult or a child to inherit
the knowledge accumulated by the deceased throughout their lifetime. This is achieved through further
acts of familiarization, by recounting in the mambeadero the origin myth of the deceased along with
other significant captaincy myths associated with them and their family members. This approach
prevents Sı̰ ́di from reclaiming the domesticated yono̰píi, thereby preventing its return to his affinal
realm. On the one hand, the impersonality of the tne’túi, which permeates the cosmos without
permanently belonging to any flesh-and-blood individual in particular, resonates with other Amazonian
notions of power as resulting from shamans or warriors’ temporary access to or harnessing of such
forces for their benefit (Langdon 1992a; Rubenstein 2007). On the other hand, the possibility for
members of a family or clan to continue benefitting from the teachings that tne’túi has registered in the
yono̰píi of their deceased relative even after the latter’s death, contradicts, to some extent, Amazonian
perceptions of such power as being non-accumulable (Rubenstein 2007, 362). This avenue of
accumulating spiritual power and enticing its persistence within the patriline is related to the Andoque’s
greater emphasis on agnation, the idiom of mastery, and agnatic identity as a firmer basis for engaging
in asymmetrical exchanges with others.
Omen and Dream Interpretation
The interplay between the personal yono̰píi and the general tne’túi gives rise to the person’s spiritual
power. To understand the nature of this power, we now turn to two faculties that serve as its main
building blocks as well as its manifestations in people’s lives: omen interpretation and dreaming. Prior

219

to delving into this discussion, it is imperative to acknowledge the local premise that the visible, lived
plane of reality is determined by the invisible, virtual plane, whose tenets are established in the mythical
tales surrounding the origins of the myriad classes of human and nonhuman beings inhabiting the world.
Sı̰ ́di prowls this invisible domain, wherein human and nonhuman entities coexist in a state of ontological
equality predating any physical distinctions, searching out vulnerable souls. This leads us back to the
notion of origin discussed in Chapter 3, shedding light on why knowing one’s origin holds such
importance in acquiring access to tne’túi’s power. It allows individuals to identify themselves and their
kin within the virtual realm, and thereby grasp the underlying forces animating them there. This
understanding enhances their chances of survival and successful exchanges within the physical realm.
The logic of omens and dream interpretation arises from this determination of the visible by the
invisible. The interplay between the tutelary and auxiliary spirit enables the person to effectively attune
to the invisible realm of myth and spirits, such that the spirit of a powerful person can actively
participate in the events of that realm, rather than being caught off guard or influenced as a passive
victim when events unfold in the visible, physical world.73 I will begin by exploring the Andoque’s
divination theory and then proceed to their dream theory.
General signs are usually referred to through the verb hɵɵ́, meaning “to tell,” as countless nonhuman
entities tell things, providing insight into forthcoming events. For example, many birds and animals
foretell rainfall or its absence, while fish behavior anticipates rising river water levels, and differentcolored lightning and thunders from various parts of the territory serve as indications of war, disease, or
sorcery. Numerous natural phenomena are also interpreted as omens for human destinies. Some omens,
termed as ḭtanńéso—“[transformation into] something of bones”—concern the fate of future victims,
such as the laughing falcon’s (Herpetotheres cachinnans) song, heralding an impending death.
Conversely, other omens unveil the emotions or intentions of future aggressors. For instance, the
extraordinary roar of the Araracuara rapids forecasts that a human being is about to drown somewhere
along the Caquetá River, even outside Andoque territory. In such cases, the recommended behavior
reveals the rationale behind Indigenous divinatory theory and its specific form of determinism. In the
subsequent days, a knowledgeable person who has discerned this sign would exercise increased caution
Walker (2010) finds among the Urarina a similar alignment between birds whose songs are portentous and a person’s
“heart-soul” (suujue), which gives its owner moral and practical advice and is a precondition of reflexive self-awareness. The
authority of both lies in their “privileged access to reality as well as its derivation from a source that lies beyond experience,
giving voice to the unspeakable” (ibid, 17)—in the concepts used here, this reality is the virtual, invisible one.
73

220

while fishing or might even abstain from it entirely. This individual would also advise their kin to do the
same, so that the calamity “will go somewhere else” and befall other, less perceptive or vigilant
individuals. The underlying idea is that the calamity must happen to someone because the omen refers to
a present or past event or situation and not to a future possibility. While we, as humans, hear the roar of
rapids, this sound represents, in fact, the joyful cheer of the fish and other entities inhabiting the falls:
“We made it! We got him!” These nonhuman entities celebrate because they have already ensnared a
human soul (mo̰no̰i) within the virtual realm and surrendered it to Sı̰ ́di, heralding the imminent
occurrence of physical death. The event is thus predetermined for the predator, but remains
undetermined for any specific prey. Therefore, people should exercise caution to ensure they do not
become the prey in question.
Another example illustrating this conception concerns the flight of the boat-billed heron (po’nn;
Cochlearius cochlearius), which foretells an arrest by the police or military forces. When this heron
passes above them, people should not turn their heads to look at it, lest they be the ones taken away. The
idea is that the armed forces of the Whites, which this heron represents, have already captured
somebody’s soul (mo̰no̰i) in the virtual realm, and by turning their head, a person discloses the weakness
of their spirit (yono̰píi), which will make them, rather than other people, fall prey to Whites in the
physical world.
In John Austin’s (1962) terminology, these examples reveal a conception of omens as constative acts
that simply depict a given state of affairs—whether in the past or present—in the invisible realm, and
that correspond to future events in the visible one. The powerful-spirited individual is the one who
perceives these omens, knows how to interpret them, and protects themselves and their relatives
accordingly. However, in other cases, also referred to as ḭtanńéso, the translation as “omen,” which
reflects a representative logic, can be misleading. These signs possess a performative nature, as the
production of ominous actions by those with weak spirits triggers the calamity. This holds true for
stumbles, falters, and other missteps by the main singer-dancers, who belong to the group of formal
guests in ceremonial dances. There are numerous accounts of individuals who have passed away, or
whose spouses or children have, shortly after forgetting the lyrics of a key song in a dance, stumbling
during the performance, or even experiencing their rattle anklets falling off while dancing. To counteract
this, people rehearse songs and dances and even collaborate with their fellow singer-dancers to establish
a sign to cover for each other in case one forgets the lyrics, preventing any expression of forgetfulness.

221

The underlying notion is that during ceremonial dances, the predatory spirits of the territory remain
watchful over the dance and the individuals summoning them through songs and dances. Even though
no act of predation has taken place in the virtual realm, as in the rapids or boat-billed heron examples,
the spirits would seize any vulnerability or lack of respect displayed by the participants and consume
them. This notion suggests that rather than merely representing an object in reality that has preexisted it,
the misstep is, in Austin’s words, a performative act that generates that object. On such occasions,
people silently remark “páa hɵ́má,” “[he could] not anymore” (ya no [pudo]), alluding to the idea that
the participant’s tutelary spirit was too feeble, leading to a lack of respect for the ceremonial dance and
its hosts, as he had not rehearsed the songs and dances sufficiently or secured his anklets properly.
Consequently, a misstep occurred that rendered him vulnerable to the spirits.
Dreaming (knéi, literally: “somebody said”) serves as another conduit through which individuals acquire
insights into the virtual, invisible realm. Dreams offer entry into that realm even to those with less
powerful thinking during their waking life, but they are deemed less reliable than other divinatory signs.
Consequently, upon learning about another’s insightful dream, a person can validate their interlocutor’s
oneiric experience: “nobody said it to you; you saw it!” (hɵ́má hakné’i; ɵhaḛpó’kni!).
The Andoque dream theory is not exceptional in the Amazonian landscape, in that they consider the
spirit to leave the body during sleep to wander (yo̰nfɵi) “in a plane of reality where the everyday
corporeal and linguistic constraints are suspended” (Descola 1989, 440), and receive, first and foremost,
presages encoded in a structure of symbolic inversions or permutations according to specific principles,
as well as more explicit messages from persons who appear as themselves (Basso 1987; Descola 1989;
Kohn 2007). The presages and messages that men and women receive in dreams arrive from their
ancestors, and men also receive messages from the mythical father who turned into coca and tobacco
and is identified with Sı̰ ́di, as we have seen in M2. Like other omens discussed above, dreams are
usually considered as foretelling future events in the visible realm by disclosing events that have already
happened and states prevailing at present in the invisible one (Galli 2012, 253). The events foretold in
one’s dreams concern not only one’s own life, but also those of one’s relatives and of others who are on
one’s mind. Therefore, people share their dreams with others, especially when warnings are required.
The main keys to Andoque dream interpretation, which sometimes overlap, are: perspectivism, mythical
origin, metonymy, formal resemblance, homology of effects, and direct representation. These keys are
surveyed in Appendix 5, where I also demonstrate that some of these dream categories reflect the

222

spiritual powers of the dreamer as well as others. However, to understand how dream interpretation
plays a role in power dynamics, it is crucial to recognize that dreams not only mirror the extent of an
individual’s spiritual power but can also be manipulated by those who wield significant spiritual
authority. This stems from the fact that the actions that people take in relation to dreams, regardless of
their interpretive key—their framing, rejection, or very elicitation—depend on their spiritual strength
and can, at the same time, increase or decrease it.
People can invoke empowering guidance and additional information in dreams concerning the matters
that occupy their thoughts by purposefully meditating on a particular subject (e.g., organizing a
ceremonial dance or the fate of a specific relative), while simultaneously consuming coca and tobacco.
Additionally, they can engage in consultations with specific ancestors or auxiliary spirits before retiring
for the night, ensuring that the figure appearing in their dream will be the chosen ancestor or spirit rather
than a malevolent animal spirit in disguise (e.g., people can invoke an auxiliary jaguar spirit by
methodically naming all the jaguar’s body parts from head to tail).
An important indicator of a person’s spiritual prowess lies in their ability to reject ominous dreams or to
avert the misfortunes they foretell. Following an unfavorable dream experienced by oneself or a family
member, it is advisable to avoid engaging in activities that align with the same category of misfortune
indicated by the dream. For instance, if one dreams of burning yarumo leaves, it is prudent to abstain
from entering the forest to prevent the risk of a snake bite. Similarly, after dreaming of rubber latex
pouring from a tree, one should beware when handling machetes and other tools to avoid accidental
injury and bleeding. Upon awakening from a dream portending illness, accidents, or death, or upon
hearing such a dream recounted by a relative, people have at least two options. First, they may dismiss
the dream as inconsequential, for example, by discarding a dream on eating food as the banal result of
coca consumption before going to sleep, rather than as an impending disease, or by interpreting grapes
in a dream (which portend tears and grief) as simply referring to seeing jaguar footprints, whose shape
resemble that of grapes, the previous day. The ability to do this both depends on one’s spiritual strength
and increases it, because a feeble-spirited person would immediately lend themselves to bemoaning their
fate, which, in turn, would weaken their spiritual resilience against these and other adversities.
Another option is to “transfer” the calamity to people living elsewhere. This is done through formulas
such as kahakoño̰e nboka nahuhai bo so̰doi oknéi: “may the thing that I know from my dream proceed to

223

people [living] on our side [i.e., elsewhere].”74 To do that, a person must be able to identify the
misfortune foretold by the dream and know its origin, as explained by Mario:
“Dreams have meanings, this is why they were created, this is why one must know ‘This dream, what does it
mean?’—so that one can say ‘No, you don’t have a reason to come here, you must go somewhere people don’t know
you.’ So the one who wanders like a person on whom one dreams, goes somewhere else, where nobody knows who
he is. Because if one knows about it [if one knows what the dream means] one says, ‘I dreamed of that, but this is
not [for] here, it is not for me, go away wherever you wanna go!’ Then the spirit says, ‘This badass (verraco) knows
me! I’d better go somewhere else!’”

A person’s mastery of dream theory also informs the framing and interpretation of dreams. Some people
discard long, serpentine dreams as nonsensical because “dreams should be short and accurate, like
thinking,” and they only accord significance to short and precise ones. However, the interpretive keys
discussed above imply a reduction of many dream narratives—even the shortest ones—to shortened
sequences and even to a single image that can be submitted to inversion, homological comparison,
mythological exploration, and other interpretive actions (Descola 1989, 443). The ability to frame
dreams and decide which sequence or image merits interpretation, affects a person’s capability to
beware of dangerous situations or to take advantage of future opportunities.

Figure 15. Mario Andoke Andoke picking coca leaves in his garden (Photo taken by the author)

People say that in the past there were powerful sorcerers who could rein in malevolent spirits and abort misfortunes
announced in dreams, but such sorcerers no longer exist today.

74

224

A person’s spiritual strength also determines how long they would remember the dream and, as a result,
how long they would be attentive and refrain from risky behavior. People disagree on how long a person
should be cautious after an ominous dream—from merely three days to the indeterminate moment when
one hears that the calamity has befallen elsewhere. Mario claims that cautiousness is needed for one
orbital period of the moon (one month):
“If nothing happened within a month, then nothing is going to happen. Because nobody can be attentive for so long.
Boredom is boredom. As a human being, one gets bored of such things [being cautious]. Within one month
everything passes, within one month everything changes, this may be that ‘climate change’ you Whites talk about
[laughing]… well this is how I see it. Each month everything changes, goes to other parts where people are not
careful and can be screwed (se pueden joder).”

It is precisely when a person forgets the dream and that they must refrain from certain things or places,
that the calamity befalls them. This absentmindedness is interpreted as the defeat of their soul by the
animal spirits, that exposes them to the actual misfortune.
As in the Kalapalo case analyzed by Ellen Basso (1987, 98), dreams are not merely constative acts
pointing to an event that would have occurred even in their absence, but rather performative acts that
elicit such events. An elder woman who claims that most personal misfortunes at the Araracuara sector
are pre-communicated to her in dreams said that, since cucuy fruits (Macoubea guianensis) portend
tears, one should not think of them in the afternoon: if one does not carry on this image into one’s
dreams, the misfortune causing the grief on which the cucuy announces will simply go elsewhere.75 Like
ominous missteps in ceremonial dances, a person dreams in such a way due to the weakness of their
spirit that made them look for the image of cucuy fruits or of other ill portents, whose appearance in the
dream will signal vulnerability to predatory spirits, and will thus generate the calamity.
In conclusion, this chapter explored how power registers in and manifests through the components of the
person and their attunement to, and participation in, the invisible predatory dynamics informing people’s
relationships in the visible reality, enabling them to better navigate and control the exchanges these
relationships involve. Similar to the other elements explored in this part of the dissertation—the maloca,
manioc, tobacco, and coca—the spiritual power that emerges from the interplay between the auxiliary
spirit and the tutelary one is associated with the river source and draws upon the mythical heroes from
We find an inverse phenomenon, that nevertheless points to a similar logic, among the Achuar, who actively summon
certain dream presages by reciting in their waking hours specific anent songs that allude to the imagery of those presages
(Descola 1989, 447).
75

225

that direction, such as Egret of the River Source, Paternity Canoe, or Sı̰ ́di, and their predatory
perspective. The tutelary spirit’s access to the auxiliary one is constitutive for the predatory capacities
contributing to the power of the center in the two river systems explored in Part I, as either a speaking
human body in the cannibalistic system, or the captain who familiarizes his men in the captaincy system.
The capabilities of the elements explored in this part become accessible to people and contribute to their
empowerment once they are familiarized by them, appropriated and encompassed within their clan
identities, much like the river source’s general familiarization and encompassment by the center in
Andoque mythology. In the next part, we will delve into further aspects of this spiritual power and of
other elements explored here. This will involve an examination of the relationships of predation,
familiarization, and competition among the various human and nonhuman centers that inhabit the
Andoque territory. In these exchanges between centers, the spiritual power and empowering elements
derived from the river source serve as crucial resources.

226

Part III
Power in a Cosmos of Multiple Centers

227

228

Introduction
As we have seen in Part I, the Andoque’s concept of “center” acknowledges the existence of multiple
centers, each one acting as such for the people inhabiting it. Furthermore, the animist tenet that
nonhuman entities are also endowed with an interiority continuous with that of humans, leads to the
conception of the cosmos as composed of multiple human as well as nonhuman centers. In this part of
the dissertation, I ask: What are the power dynamics among human centers and between them and the
nonhuman ones? How are asymmetries in exchange among human centers articulated with asymmetries
in exchange with nonhuman centers? To contextualize the approach through which I will explore the
power relations among centers in the subsequent chapters, I provide a brief review here of the literature
concerning the Amazonian analogy between inter-human relations and human-nonhuman relations, as
well as the asymmetrical ontologies held by the People of the Center.
Anthropologists have long argued that the relations between people and nonhuman beings in Amazonian
societies are analogous to relations among human beings in these societies. Descola’s comparative study
involving three Amazonian collectives—the Jivaro, Campas, and Tukano—illustrates how different
modes of relations, such as predation, gift-giving, and reciprocity, structure both inter-human and
human-nonhuman relationships within each collective (Descola 1998; 2013, 336–59). According to
Descola, the Jivaro seek to appropriate the bodies and identities of affinal others in various contexts of
their lives, including hunting, capturing wives and children, warfare, or head-hunting, in order to
reproduce themselves without any intention of reciprocating the bodies or identities obtained. By
contrast, the Campas employ predation logic in relations with other specific categories of human and
nonhuman beings while viewing their relations with other peoples, species, and spirits as guided by
generosity and benevolence (idem 2013, 352–58). Finally, the Tukanoans engage in reciprocal exchange
with both human affines—members of other linguistic groups comprising the Vaupés system—and
nonhuman entities (idem 1998; 2013, 345–52). For instance, the masters of animals return the souls of
the humans they kill to the birth house of their clan, and hunters return the spirit of the slain animals to
their place of origin (K. Århem 1996).76

76
Here it is also important to note that earlier analyses of human-nonhuman affinal reciprocity among the Tukanoans and
other peoples pertaining to the Vaupés social complex emphasized the human-nonhuman symmetry, based on the
thermodynamic model where human groups strive to maintain a balance between their input and output of the vital
substances they share with nonhumans (“energy”) (Reichel 1989; Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971; 1976; van der Hammen 1992;
von Hildebrand 1983). By contrast, later accounts focused on the Tukanoan Macuna pinpointed both the human-nonhuman
asymmetry reflected in the privileged role of human beings, and shamans in particular (Cayón 2011; 2017), in fertilizing

229

As demonstrated in previous chapters, the Andoque appear to align more closely with the generalized
predatory relational model than with the other two models. As we will see in Chapter 9, illnesses and
other misfortunes are considered as the animals’ way to take revenge of the humans who hunt them and
whom they generally resent for their speech capacity. Additionally, while the Andoque occasionally
engage in exchange with nonhuman entities to prevent such misfortunes, they reject any idea of alliance
with them. Their dances, as we will see in Chapter 11, reflect a primary concern with protecting the
human group, with the regeneration of some nonhumans being a by-product. Despite the belief that the
souls of the dead Andoque may go to specific ancestral origin sites such as the Site of Tears, the
guardian spirits of animals are not believed to send them there after consuming their body. On the
contrary, and similar to the Miraña’s “impossible quest for the kalos thanatos” (Karadimas 1999),
human souls are more likely to be incorporated into the sites of origin of the nonhuman entities and
pathogens inflicting that death. As to inter-human relations (Chapter 10), while Andoque members often
cite “sister exchange” as the ideal, they have also taken different means in recent history to establish a
non-reciprocal marital exchange, including the creation of a gender gap.
On the other hand, the Andoque’s emphasis on patrilineal descent, the hierarchy between captains and
orphans (which was greater before the genocide) and between ceremonial specializations, as well as the
ceremonial relationships between maloca owners (e.g., García 2016; Gasché 2009; Lucas 2021), brings
them closer to their Tukano neighbors (and the Yucuna, on the south border of the Vaupés system). This
similarity owes not so much to a logic of reciprocal exchange between human groups and between
humans and nonhumans, but to the “superordinate” dimensions of the Andoque society. I draw here on
S. Hugh-Jones’s (2019 [1996]) borrowing of Mary Helms’s (1993) terms “acquisitional polities” and
“superordinate societies” that seeks rendering Descola’s model of structural homology more politically
and ideologically informed. According to Hugh-Jones, the Jivaro groups, along with the Yanomamö and
Araweté, exemplify acquisitional polities in their constant search “to dominate the outside and the
‘other’ in order to strengthen and legitimate their own political center,” with “other” to be understood as
both human and nonhuman entities. By contrast, the Tukanoans are similar to the Xinguanos and Bororo
in being a superordinate society “who seek[s] to expand the scope of influence of an ordered center by
the defensive control of the external powers that threaten their integrity” (S. Hugh-Jones 2019a, 112).

nonhuman species and maintaining the order of the cosmos, and the separate circuits within which human and animal vital
energies circulate (K. Århem 2001). Additionally, among the Arawakan groups bordering with the Tukanoan complex, an
ideology of mutual predation nearing the Andoque’s complements reciprocal exchange (Estorniolo 2020).

230

Such a defensive attitude toward external cosmic powers exists among the People of the Center,
including the Andoque, and is evident in the processes through which they filter and decontaminate
different substances of nonhuman origin, deemed, in Echeverri’s interlocutors’ words, “the husk that the
Creator was left with after having created humanity” (Echeverri 2001). Echeverri takes the metaphor of
decontamination from the People of the Center’s domestic culinary practices to reject the analogy
between inter-human and human-nonhuman relations among these peoples, an analogy which is rooted,
in turn, in what he perceives as anthropologists’ over-emphasis on hunting practices, which has given
rise to the ethnographic topos of a link between affinity and predation. Contrary to the widespread
association between affines and nonhuman beings, Echeverri stresses the barrier that the People of the
Center perceive between humanity and nonhumanity, and these peoples’ justification of predation
through moral discourse, with animals’ representing dangers to human sociality.
This ontological asymmetry has been enshrined in the substantive perspectivism that Londoño identifies
among the Féénemɨna, who posit the existence of “a substantive humanity and a true human perspective
[which is] exclusively that of the human species” (2017, 485). The exceptionalism of homo sapiens is
linked to Londoño’s argument that the Féénemɨna do not possess a native model of predatory affinity or
affinity-like predation, despite evidence that in mythology, in-law relations are presented as predatory
relations (idem 2012, 139) and that both game and marriageable women are named as fruits (idem 2005,
18). Although Londoño describes both affines and game as “others” who endanger the domestic group
and, as such, must be transformed in order to be incorporated into that group without harming it, he
stresses the critical difference between the two categories: “Affines are Real People, and hence easily
transformed… animals, on the contrary, are irredeemably evil” (idem 2005, 18). However, both
Londoño and Echeverri acknowledge that mere membership in the human species does not
automatically guarantee one’s true human status. For example, Londoño mentions the Féénemɨna’s
belief that the People of the Center are more human than other human groups. Similarly, statements
expressed in clan mambeadero sessions suggest that certain clans consider themselves more virtuous
than others and claim to have been created at the true center of the world, implying a higher degree of
humanity (Londoño Sulkin 2010, 280; 2012, 6). Therefore, it becomes evident that further information
on clan dynamics and inter-clan relations is necessary to assess the degree of dis/continuity between
humanity and animality. Additionally, such information is vital for determining whether inter-human
relations and human-nonhuman relations are analogous or connected in a different manner.

231

In the Andoque case, the link between affinity and predation seems to be stronger than among the
Féénemɨna. Beyond the mythological representations of in-law relationships as predatory, as
demonstrated in previous chapters, Andoque members interpret dreams about sexual intercourse or
avoidance thereof as foretelling disease (i.e., predation by nonhumans) or successful hunt, respectively.
Additionally, as we will see in Chapter 9, the Andoque view different cases of illness and death as
consequences of sexual relations with nonhuman beings. They explain that a person who is attacked by
any animal, from snakes to bullet ants, should kill it, because animals would bewitch the game escaping
them, just like a person is said to be prone to bewitch the lover who has left him or her for another. Not
only are affines associated with animals, but predation by one category is continuous with predation by
the other. Animals are “deviators,” yoíkőɵ, in that associating with them can make people deviate from
their bodily core (odɨ) and from the course set for them by the embodied principles of their clan
origins—just as yoíkő and ḭdɨ are opposed to each other and are translated as “false” and “true/proper,”
respectively. This deviation can render the person vulnerable to other human clans and groups (i.e., to be
absorbed in them), or to disease and death incurred by animals. The traditions transmitted within each
clan protect people from such predatory deviation. Therefore, while members of other clans are
marriageable because they are human, associating with them exposes an individual to other origin
principles, myth versions, and patrilineal traditions that may deviate that individual from their own
patrilineally-transmitted traditions, and, as such, would leave them defenseless in case they are
aggressed by animals. As we will see in Chapters 9 and 10, undesired relations with animals can lead to
undesired relations with people, and vice versa.
The continuity between inter-human relations and human-nonhuman ones is evident in Andoque
members’ frequently mentioned strategy of transferring catastrophes elsewhere, that we have seen in the
previous chapter. This approach contrasts with Echeverri’s model of decontamination, which seeks to
neutralize all harms and pathogens. While his model assumes the subjection of predation to morality, the
Andoque’s strategy is predatory, as it directs malignant nonhuman entities toward other people. In other
words, for the Andoque, predation remains a central logical operator, which does not only mark analogy,
but also underlies the continuity, between inter-human and human-nonhuman relations.
However, predation is not the sole logical operator within this continuum of relations: the closely related
notion of familiarization, which eludes both Londoño and Echeverri, plays a significant role. In their
analyses, both anthropologists group affinal relations and reciprocal exchange together, as evidenced in

232

Echeverri’s reluctance to refer to nonhumans as “potential affines,” in contrast to the real or virtual ones
(Viveiros de Castro and Fausto 1993). Consequently, he does not explore the decontamination of
substances of nonhuman origin, which transforms them into life-giving for humans, as a particular form
of familiarization.77 As we have seen in previous chapters, Andoque cosmology aligns more readily with
the widespread Amazonian notion of inherent meta-affinity. Unlike Echeverri’s approach, and in line
with the Andoque’s more explicit connection between affinity and predation, the following chapters
explore the relationships among multiple centers not only through the lens of the continuum between
inter-human relations and human-nonhuman ones but also considering the continuity between predation
and familiarization. In this continuity, familiarization emerges as an asymmetric moment that constitutes
the human and nonhuman centers taking part in the predatory exchange. The mastery dimension of
familiarizing predation is especially relevant for examining the continuity between inter-human and
human-nonhuman relations since it highlights the significance of familiarizing various foodstuffs and
nonhuman elements as a fundamental step to familiarize humans. In Amazonian ethnography, an
example of this continuity is the Wari’ parents’ practice to neutralize meat to promote the transformation
of a child into their human kin (Vilaça 2002). In the Andoque case, as we observed in previous chapters,
the captain shares ritual substances that have been previously familiarized with his men before a dance
to ensure their good-spirited collaboration.
The notion of continuity is also key here because familiarization itself represents a continuum of
asymmetrical relations, ranging from neutralizing the dangers inherent in affinal others to manipulating
them for different ends. Exploring the different positions along this continuum that one enacts towards
both human and nonhuman real and potential affines, we can gain a deeper understanding of the
previously mentioned concept of ontological asymmetry prevalent among the People of the Center
(García 2018; Griffiths 1998; Londoño Sulkin 2005; Lucas 2021).
This part is divided into four chapters. In Chapter 8, I discuss the Andoque’s general perception of their
ancestral territory, characterized by the presence of various nonhuman centers, where notions of
asymmetrical exchange and domination prevail. The exclusion of competing human groups from this
territory is expressed through the idiom of managing relations with these nonhumans. In Chapter 9, I
explore the spectrum of relations between human and nonhuman centers, encompassing predation of one

Cf. the paradigmatic case in Echeverri’s cited article (2001) of vegetal salt, which, once decontaminated, is conceived as
milk and sperm—i.e., as consanguineous substances.
77

233

class of center by another, counter-predation, familiarization and, ultimately, mastery for different
purposes. Chapter 10 delves into relations among human centers, with a primary focus on the patrilineal
clan. It examines aspects such as warfare, rivalry, distrust, and secrecy among clans, as well as the ways
in which these antagonistic attitudes intersect with previously explored relations with nonhumans.
Evidently, this chapter also discusses the terms for establishing exchange and alliances between rival
human centers. Finally, Chapter 11 presents the Andoque ceremonial dances as sites of convergence
between the antagonisms and efforts of familiarization and mastery, which characterize relations among
human centers and between them and nonhuman ones.

234

Chapter 8. The Territory and Its Persons
In this chapter I address the question: What is the ancestral territory, how is it defined, and who are the
social and political agents operating within it? The main concept for territory or land in Andoque is
ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí. In Spanish, Andoque members most commonly employ the word territorio, while sometimes,
particularly when comparing their land with those of other peoples and nonhuman beings, they use
mundo (“world”). During the workshop in December 2018, which the meeting with a representative of
the Colombian National Natural Parks agency (Parques Nacionales Naturales, hereafter, Parques)
described in the introduction sought to plan, and which aimed at formulating the initial components of
the Andoque’s “cultural plan for territorial management,” the Andoque embarked on defining the
fundamental concepts of their land, inevitably starting with territorio. In my designated role as secretary,
and following lively debates by the Andoque participants, encompassing both youth and elders, I typed
and edited the ensuing definition:
“The territory is called ‘Land of Life’ (pḭiñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí) because it is composed of various classes of living beings, each
endowed with their customs, thought, history, and powers; these living beings keep the territory alive through their
own lives and the interrelations between them. Before its creation, the world was a big fire, emitting heat, and full of
illnesses, diseases, war, anger, and disorder. The first action taken by the Creator was to cool (ú’ɵi) this fire,
resulting in order and well-being. The stories of the living beings are inscribed in the territory, in their sites of origin
and where they have lived, practiced their powers, elaborated their own customs, and fought with others. Upon
creation, the Creator left some rules for each living being and assigned certain persons to be in charge of the sites
where these beings were created and where important events in the history of the territory had taken place. Bits and
pieces of the thinking and speech of the Creator through which the world was formed and that are inscribed in it,
have been transmitted to the living beings through the origin sites of each animal species and especially through the
origin sites of each clan of the People of the Axe. Therefore, once we take into account the history, the sites of the
territory, and the other components of the world, the thinking and speech of the People of the Axe participate in the
management of the territory and are crucial for its order.”

The participants arrived at this definition by contrasting it with the definition of territory held by Whites,
which I provided in response to their request, and according to which, in this standard definition,
territory is an area where a group of people holds jurisdiction and enjoys exclusive usufruct rights. Upon
hearing my definition, Nestor, Fisi’s son of the Eagle Clan, commented: “So they don’t take into
account the life of trees and animals, as we do! Because, for us, the territory has many owners!” As a
result, the definition reflects the shared origin and destiny of human and nonhuman co-dwellers of the
land, along with the animist recognition of the latter’s subjectivity and agency. This definition also
acknowledges that nonhuman entities control and protect the different sites and species of the land,
235

aligning with the conceptions of other Amazonians where the cosmos consists of overlapping domains
and traversed by human and nonhuman ownership relationships, challenging Western cartographies of
discrete property zones (Fausto 2008). However, when I read the final document aloud for approval on
the final day of the workshop, Nestor requested to qualify his statement regarding multiple ownership,
stating: “But the territory was given to us so we could use it.” Elias, a maloquero of fifty years old,
emphasized, reflecting the assumption that non-Indigenous people also adhere to the preservationist
standards they demand of Indigenous communities: “The plan must make it clear that we, as humans,
are superior to Nature and dominate it. This is how things have been since Creation. So that the White
won’t say that we’re like him, who is dominated by Nature.”

Figure 16. Nestor Andoke Macuna burning plants for the preparation of vegetal salt (Photo taken by the author)

Although no Parques personnel attended the workshop, Andoque participants expected them and other
non-Indigenous officials to read the resulting document, and so inserting these statements was intended
to prevent future foreign intervention based on claims of biodiversity preservation, as the participants
thought that acknowledging the existence of nonhuman owner-persons might make Whites infer that the
Andoque had no right to it. However, the conception of human superiority vis-à-vis nonhumans in the
Andoque territory cannot be reduced to this context. At first glance, this can be attributed to an
oscillation among Andoque members between animist perceptions of the land and naturalist
perspectives, where nonhuman entities are seen as objects accessible for human use, lacking autonomy,
subjectivity, and agency. Although, as will be explored below, contemporary territorial politics may
contribute to the development of such ontological ambiguity and adherence to naturalist perspectives,
236

this chapter demonstrates how the apparent contradiction in the statements expressed during the
workshop can also be explained within the framework of the Andoque’s animist conception of territory.
As I will show, the Andoque’s version of animism is hierarchical, enabling the ontological asymmetry
which is on par with the asymmetrical exchanges sought between humans and nonhumans, and,
ultimately, among human centers, to be explored throughout this part of the dissertation. While drawing
on data from the entire fieldwork period including my later visit in 2021, I return in this chapter to the
statements made during the territorial management workshop and the mambeadero sessions at Fisi’s
maloca during and following that week, where he elaborated on the workshop themes.
Creator-Persons and Site-Persons
As elsewhere in Amazonia, the Andoque consider the human or nonhuman person who created a given
material or immaterial thing, human or nonhuman persons and groups, who protects it from predation by
others—although not necessarily by that creator—and/or allows for its reproduction as the owner or
master of that thing, person, or group (Brightman 2010; Brightman et al. 2016; Fausto 2008). In
Spanish, Andoque members often refer to owners as dueños, while in the native language the term
denoting mastery or ownership is ño̰, “person.” This term conveys the idea that the owner/master of a
given entity or group of entities is its personified aspect.78 Thus, similar to other Amazonian notions of
ownership and mastery (Costa 2017; Fausto 2008; Viveiros de Castro 1998, 471), the owner-person is
endowed with subjectivity, intentionality, and agency, enabling it to act on behalf of those it personifies,
akin to a captain and maloca owner who serves as the “person-body trunk” of his personnel. Countless
deities and spirits are considered “the persons” (nño̰e) of the species, substances, instruments, myths,
dances, sorcery spells, illnesses, cures, and other cultural practices that they created or were the first to
employ in mythology. To stress this aspect of owner-persons, I refer to them here as “creator-persons.”
To benefit from the things or practices they personify (or to protect oneself from them, if that thing is an
illness), one must converse with “those who created that work” (báɒ̋i oa tiɵ) to align their agency with
one’s own; in other words, to master these masters. Conversely, mentioning the names of these creatorpersons or contemplating on the origins of the things they own without offering them coca powder,
tobacco paste, and manicuera (sometimes a ceremonial dance is also required) amounts to summoning
them empty-handed. In turn, they would seek out those invoking them, causing harm through disease
and other predatory acts if the invoker does not provide them with any offering. During a mambeadero

78

Despite their similarity, ño̰ and ñó̰i (“earth”) do not share a common root.

237

session at his maloca after one of the workshop days, Fisi formulated the following phrase to his
interlocutors Nestor and Elias, who inquired about the traditional rules for managing the territory: “One
does not invoke them [the owner-persons] without [offering] anything [i.e., ritual substances]” (hɵ́má
niḛ nbokani). This is also why, at different moments during fieldwork, people refrained from telling me
certain myths in detail or at all, or refrained from explaining about powerful disease.
In the Andoque’s accounts on the owner-persons of animals and of other nonhuman beings, two types of
dominions can be discerned: mythical ascendence and micro-ecosystem habitat. In this regard, the
Andoque resemble their Murui-Muina neighbors, as observed by García, who distinguish between the
masters of single-species groups (to which I prefer to call more precisely “groups of a single mythic
origin”) and the masters of multi-species groups (or “groups of multiple mythic origins”) (2018, 225–27,
245–50). According to García, the former maintain filial and protective relations with the animal
personnel, while the latter maintain relations of affinity and predation with their personnel, dominating
this multi-species group similar to how a human captain dominates his people. The different
relationships that each type of master maintains with its personnel roughly corresponds to the Achuar’s
distinction between the “game mothers,” who both protect and prey on their “children,” and the “game
ama̰na̰”—the leaders of game animals, with whom hunters dialog to ensure success (Descola 1994b,
257–60).
The Andoque refer to various nonhuman entities as ḭsu yahaǵtı̋ ɵ: “those who were created for the
animal(s).” Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 82 n.100) also translate this as “principles/princes of the
animals” (principios/príncipes) to convey both the power of these animate beings, and the idea that they
serve as molds for the animals they created, imprinting them with key characteristics such as ecological
stratum, predatory status, and behavior. The primary creator-persons include Nénéfi, the captain of
eagles and creator of most birds; Sı̰ ́di, the captain of jaguars and of the predatory principle in land
animals; Red Anaconda (Pe’pai), the captain of anacondas, fish, and the predatory principle in the latter;
Pineapple (Tomirepa), the captain of game animals, and Sun, who created the monkeys (doɨsua,
“animals of above”). The predatory aspect of these creator-masters—except for Pineapple, who is a fruit
and is associated with the “fruit” dimension of various species where they serve as prey to others—
signals the agency of these species and their ability to prey on others in various ways. Other lesser
creator-persons include Moon, who created many edible fish; Usiñémn, who created some white-lipped
peccaries (íń; Tayassu pecari) by attaching peccary eyes to a group of blind hunters (see Chapter 9);
Shadow Egg, and many others. These owner-persons, sometimes referred to as the grandfathers
238

(nyo’tapɵ) of the species they created, protect them, and can be invoked in shamanic incantations to
promote their reproduction.
After the initial creation of these species, as stated in the workshop document, the Creator appointed
guardian spirits to oversee the sites where they were created and where they live and reproduce.
Collectively known as ’i’bo ño̰e (“persons of there”), these owner-persons possess specific sites referred
to as ḭño̰e fɵsí, meaning “a persons’ place.” To stress this aspect, I refer to them as “site-persons.”
Similar to the Yucuna, the specific names given to each such person and their corresponding sites
indicate the existence of distinct micro-habitats within the Andoque territory (Reichel 1989, 80). They
personify the sites they safeguard and the plants and animals that inhabit them. Such conception is
attested in such statements as “The owner of that site is already tired,” explaining why people refrain
from clearing forest plots for gardens in areas that have been overexploited. Through site-persons, the
land is personified in general, allowing, for example, “to talk with the land” (ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí ɵma hɵɵ́ñe). The
site-persons are also sometimes referred to as ḭsu yahaǵtı̋ ɵ. This is because, while the mythical heroes
who originally created the different species maintain a loose oversight of their creations, the site-persons
take on the role of actively protecting their personnel—the animals and plants of these species living
within their domains—and ensuring their continuous reproduction. There are instances where the two
categories “creator-persons” and “site-persons” converge, either because the mythical heroes who
created certain species, cultural practices, or illnesses are associated with specific sites, or because they
created them while passing through such sites.
The site-persons have the responsibility to regulate predation among their personnel, as the beings
within their domains feed on each other, and to protect them from external predators such as animals
from other sites and human beings. As in Fausto’s (2008) depiction of the typical Amazonian owner,
the’i’bo ño̰e appear as predatory affinal figures to outsiders, and as protective, father-like figures to their
own personnel. When entering a site with a powerful site-person, visitors must take precautions to avoid
rain, thunderstorms, and attacks by the site-person’s “pets” (éna̰), which include snakes and other
dangerous animals. In a silent manner, the visitor should address the owner while offering coca powder,
tobacco paste, and vegetal salt specifically prepared for that occasion, acknowledging the entity as the
site-person and expressing that they are only passing through without any intention to cause harm.
Importantly, the visitor should also identify himself by name and as the site-person’s grandson (haɵ́tɵ
knɵ́tɵ) and the inhabitant of the territory. He can add to it an assertive statement, such as the one shared
with me by an elder interlocutor: Koi mn oa ḛ́’dɨ kḛ́’e. Oɨ bo’ɨ.—“Don’t tell me ‘Who are you?’ I am [a
239

person you know].” It is advised to avoid hunting in sites with more powerful site-person and instead
hunt in those with less powerful ones. A hunter should provide similar offerings (ḭtaséa) to a site-person
in whose domain where he wishes to hunt, assuring them that his intention is solely to provide food for
his family and not to cause unnecessary harm. Before clearing trees to create a garden plot and during
the period of its use, men should make coca and tobacco offerings to the site-person of the area and
engage in dialog with them to ensure the safety and well-being of themselves and their families. While
the Andoque (as well as their neighbors [García 2018, 237]) commonly refer to these dialogs as seeking
permission from the site-persons, the approaches reflected in some reported formulas vary from kind yet
decisive notice to confrontation and intimidation. Examples range from “I am now going to work here
for a few years and then leave some fruits for your children [the animals],” to “I will work here to
provide for my wife and children; you [the owner], go away from here and look elsewhere, don’t pay
attention to me!” to “I will not harass you, and do not harass me, let’s fear each other” (kaha yinayíhai).
Some site-persons are depicted as a big, usually predatory species, such as a jaguar, an anaconda, a
snake, or a large fish (e.g., Pseudoplatystoma sp.), who serve as the foundation on which other
organisms of the site—sometimes even the water in the case of a backwater site—depend. Other sitepersons are completely invisible, while some are persons who happened to pass in the site and are still
living there (ñe nɵi), within its ground. This is why site-persons are often referred to as kakńño̰e
(“People of Below”), signifying earlier human generations (see Chapter 2).
The way people currently describe such disappearances suggests a view of the site-person as
personifying the entirety of beings living within their domains. It is believed that the mo̰no̰i (soul) of the
victim of a specific disease, sorcery attack, or physical aggression by animals, goes to the origin site of
that specific disease, sorcery spell, or animal. In other words, the soul becomes trapped by the owner of
the species, illness, or cultural practice (referred to as dómo̰no̰i, meaning “soul taking”). For instance, if
a person dies from a snake bite, their soul is believed to go to the place from which snakes originated.
Predation by site-persons, and the subsequent entrapment within their invisible malocas in their
domains, is inferred only when a person’s body completely disappears there. One such case occurred
during my fieldwork when a non-Indigenous Colombian man drowned in the Araracuara rapids. The
People explained that if he had died, his body would have resurfaced somewhere along the river.
However, since this did not happen, people inferred that he was “enchanted” (encantado) and his soul
was taken (dómo̰no̰i) by Fisio̰ ́ hḛkn (“Rock Harbor”) the owner of the rapids, in whose maloca (which
seems to humans like underwater rocks) he now lives. Such utter disappearance implies that his body
240

was consumed by more than one species, possibly even by many or all of them; in short, it was
consumed by the site itself, which is personified by its site-person. As a result, rather than going to the
origin site of the aggressor species, the victim’s soul stays in that specific site. People who have
disappeared in either the recent or distant past, and whose souls can be thus traced to specific sites such
as rapids, saltlicks, and lakes, become mediators between their living kin and the site-person. I was told
that, as a White person, I could turn to the drowned Colombian man, who, despite having a black
complexion, was blanco like me in that he was non-Indigenous, whenever I want to visit the rapids or
fish there. I could ask him to represent me before the rapids’ site-person, ensuring that I would not be
harmed, similar to how Andoque fishermen turn to Sitepa, an Andoque man who drowned there in the
distant past. The memory of Sitepa (or the drowned Colombian person) enhances the personification of
the site, as reflected in the name of the site-person, thereby further facilitating communication with it.
The site-persons are sometimes also referred to as diablos (“devils”). This term alludes to their
nonhuman and extraordinary existence, which is largely invisible but can manifest itself in the form of a
shadow or some other exceptional vision or sound. It also refers to the potential harm they can cause to
those visiting their site or abusing it or their animals, even long time after the abuse has taken place.
Despite being grouped with other diablos collectively called fi’du in Andoque, the site-persons have
distinct characteristics. The other fi’du are mobile, proactively aggressive, and of a purely malign
character, actively seeking out people in the forest and even in their gardens to assault them. By contrast,
the site-persons primarily adopt a defensive stance and are immobile. The difference between these
fi’du, which will be examined in the next chapter, and the site-persons can be compared to the difference
that exists between individual hunters who enter the forest to communicate with and prey on animals on
their own behalf, and captains, who communicate with enemies and prey on them for the entire group,
operating from their malocas.
Ño̰ ́ ifɵsi: Territory as Connectivity
Beyond multiple ownership, the definition of the Andoque territory above reveals a perception that
combines both space and connectivity, which serves as the platform for asymmetrical exchanges among
the territory’s human and nonhuman co-dwellers. The term ño̰ ́ i means “earth, soil,” while fɵsí refers to
place, where the defining aspect is not boundaries but interrelatedness. As Nestor explained during
workshop discussions, “The word ño̰ ́ i has no sense on its own, it’s just the earth when you take it from
the ground and hold it in your hand—it’s dead. Only when the earthworm eats it does it become

241

ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí.” Later in the mambeadero session at his maloca, Fisi further explained to me that ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí is the
upper layer of the earth which tree roots reach, providing nourishment for the tree and for the beings
living above ground. Similar to Echeverri’s interpretation of the People of the Center’s conception of
territory as appetite or desire, which drives different human and nonhuman beings to connect with others
(and their respective territories) for growth and reproduction (2005), what constitutes a territory is the
connectivity between the classes of beings deriving nourishment from it and from each other. As we will
see in the following chapters, this connectivity is perpetuated in ritualized negotiations, providing
insights into why Andoque members sometimes translate ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí as “world,” implying a particular logic
and order reminiscent of the Greek concept “cosmos” and the fundamental essence of the Spanish word
mundo, which conveys notions of elegance and propriety.
Ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí means “this world,” referring to where Andoque people live. However, like the shorter form fɵsí,
it is a generic term, and Andoque interlocutors acknowledge the existence of many such worlds. Some
of these worlds are inhabited solely by nonhuman entities, while others include also human peoples of
other groups. Andoque interlocutors mention various ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí that overlap with their own, as well as
others that are encompassed by it, bordering with it, or located far away from it. Furthermore, while
these diverse worlds have a spatial dimension, not all of them necessarily manifest in our geographical
space, but rather exist as realms of spiritual management. Among the worlds mentioned by Andoque
interlocutors are the worlds of neighboring Indigenous peoples, the World of the (Ocelot) Stars (fɵɵko
fɵsí), the Netherworld (kakn ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí), the (Game) Animals World (ḭsu yañó̰ḭ́ fɵsí), the Birds World (hiɵfo
yaño̰ ́ ifɵsi), the World of the Center (dʉi ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí), the World by Our Side (of the Caquetá, on its northern
bank) (kahako ño̰ ́ ifɵsi), the Worlds of the River Source and River Mouth (ɵbai ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí and ɵkɒ́ ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí,
respectively), the Whites World or the City (duiɵhɵ yañó̰ḭ́ fɵsí; literally, the Burners World), the Worlds
of Heat (pa̰i ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí) and Darkness (tipɵnnɵ́ɵ̋i fɵsí) from which different kinds of disease and sorcery
originate and where the spirits of the dead reside, as well as the general kusi ño̰ ́ ifɵsi, or “another world,”
denoting the worlds the Andoque do not know.
In each world or territory, there are different site-owners whose names, approaches to them, and the
composition and extension of their domains—the sites and animals they protect—are inscribed in the
distinct origin myths of each world or territory. These aspects are typically unknown to inhabitants of

242

other worlds/territories.79 Consequently, visiting another territory—be it the World of Darkness or the
Land of the Bora people—without a local companion (human or nonhuman) who can appease the
owner-persons is considered dangerous. Engaging in activities like hunting or creating a garden in such
worlds/territories, particularly those geographically materialized worlds inhabited by other ethnic
groups, is even more perilous. Similar to the beliefs held by the Féénemɨna (Londoño Sulkin 2000, 330),
living outside one’s ancestral land exposes individuals to illnesses and harms caused by owner-persons
who perceive them as intruders. Additionally, the knowledge possessed by foreigners does not offer
protection against local harms because effective healing and protection procedures rely on
communication with specific owner-persons whose authority is limited to their own territory. This
renders cultural practices, including cures, sorcery, and ceremonial dances, ineffective when performed
in other territories. Even the act of thinking itself is affected, since it requires invoking the spirits who
guard the myths, substances, practices, species, and sites that serve as objects of thought. Spatial
disorientation is thus linked to mental disorientation and submission to the authority of locals who
dictate what one can and cannot do in a particular ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí.
By highlighting another person’s foreignness to a specific ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, a native of that world/territory asserts
their greater capacity to survive and thrive there, claiming authority over the outsider. This way, as
Christopher Gregory points out, cosmological discourse regarding stewarding the land through
communication with nonhuman beings intertwines with and validates political practices that restrict the
access of others to that land (1997, 115–16). This discourse is also on par with the widespread use of
localized rituals and place sacredness in advancing land claims, both vis-à-vis the State and with other
ethnic and religious groups (e.g., Stadler 2020). Thus, the fact that Andoque members asked me to
define territorio on the first day of the workshop and expressed surprise at the lack of recognition by
Whites regarding nonhuman ownership does not imply that their frequent use of this term is not
underpinned by another of its key dimensions: the privileged use and enjoyment of a space by a
particular human group.
Owners vis-à-vis the State
Ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí’s connectivity is also critical for the Andoque’s negotiations over power in relation to the State.
At a meeting with a SINCHI (the Amazonian Institute of Scientific Research) representative in May

See García 2018, 230 for the connection between mythic origins and the relationships between individuals of different
species among the Murui-Muina.
79

243

2018, the Andoque were asked to contribute to the introduction section of a “Life Plan” for CRIMA’s
peoples that the two organizations were drafting, and to which members of the other three ethnicities
had already contributed. Those members had provided “words of wisdom” from their respective
ethnicities, such as “abundance,” “life,” or “make dawn,” which served as superordinate categories
under which they described their values. When asked if they agreed with these concepts, the Andoque
participants were perplexed. Levy of the Sun Clan dismissed them altogether: “We don’t have all that.
The first word for the Andoque is territorio.” Many of my male interlocutors made similar assertions in
different contexts throughout fieldwork.
However, the meaning of the notion of territory has changed over time, and with it, so has the notion of
territorial property. Since the creation or transformation of persons and things establishes a relation of
property between them and the creator/transformer, the Andoque attribute varying degrees of ownership
over different spaces based on the nurturing of relationships with their nonhuman inhabitants that affects
their behavior or by transforming the land through the establishment of gardens, which is the clearest
example of a person’s property.80 As stated in Chapter 3 and similar to other People of the Center
(Echeverri 2009; Karadimas 2013, 188), the clans, not the Andoque as a unified political group, were
considered the human owners of their territories prior to the rubber genocide. The notion of clan
ownership persists today through the implicit yet widely recognized boundaries that separate the areas
for hunting and fishing—particularly for commercial ends—of the different Andoque settlements, which
in most cases correspond to clans. Members of different clans assert their exclusive right to hunt or fish
in these areas by evoking their spiritual management there, achieved by ongoing interactions with the
site-persons. I observed various instances where individuals criticized or reprimanded members of other
settlements or clans for encroaching on their management areas, and it is said that before the genocide,
such trespassing could lead to violent conflicts or inter-clan wars. However, as explained by different
interlocutors, the ownership of a territory by one clan did not completely prevent members of other clans
from accessing it. Through marriage, a man would gain access to the lands of his wife’s clan, where he
could clear forest plots for gardens, like a Nɨpóde man who continues to tend to and expand the gardens
that he established near his Andoque father-in-law’s maloca during the period of uxorilocality. While
Andoque-speaking clans populated the land south of the Caquetá River, stretching from the mouth of
Spawning River in the west to the mouth of Green River in the east, these arrangements made it

80

For a similar Miraña perception, see Karadimas 2013, 184–85.

244

challenging to clearly demarcate clan and ethnic territories. Instead of fixed boundaries, territories were
differentiated through the relationship of their residents to topographical and hydrological sites, such as
rivers, rock formations, and waterfalls, where important mythical episodes occurred, and which are
inhabited by powerful nonhuman site-persons with whom those residents communicated. Many of these
sites were not possessed by Andoque-speaking clans in the conventional sense of exercising sovereignty
over them. Some sites lie outside the area inhabited by these clans, like Angusturas canyon upriver from
Spawning River or Córdoba cascade downriver from Green River. Other significant sites, such as the
Site of Tears, have never been settled by humans because they are believed to be occupied by nonhuman
mythical heroes.
While ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí conveys the notion of connectivity between human inhabitants and nonhuman co-dwellers
of the land, and the eventual restriction of foreign usufruct based on such connectivity, the concept of
territorio implies connectivity with another agent—namely, the State—through recognition. The
Andoque’s contemporary use of the term territorio cannot be divorced from the processes of Indigenous
political mobilization and State’s recognition of their lands and rights in recent decades, such that to
understand this use of the term we must also examine these processes. Roberto Pineda, who conducted
fieldwork with the Andoque in the early 1970s, shared with me in personal communications (January
2022) that during his time there, the concept territorio had not played a prominent role in their discourse,
even among the then Spanish-speaking youth who are now the group’s elders. He attributed the
emergence of this concept to Fisi’s two-year stay in Bogotá in the late 1970s when the future cacique
began mentioning “territory” to him, emphasizing more systematically the connections between its sites
and mythology. Pineda attributes this change to the influence of Andean political discourse to which Fisi
was exposed during that period. However, this does not imply that Andoque members did not previously
discuss their ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí (or the ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí of other beings) or link mythical tales with specific sites within the
land. Jon Landaburu, whom I also asked about the temporal depth of the concept’s use in Andoque
discourse, reminded me that the first words Yiñékɒ had addressed to him, followed by the myth of Sun
and Moon, had been: “I who knows, I will tell you about this place/land (ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí)” (See also Landaburu
1979, 279). Yet, the choice to translate this term most frequently into territorio when speaking Spanish,
instead of mundo or tierra (“land”), especially when interacting with State agents, aligns with the
centrality of the notion of “territory” in Indigenous, Afro-Colombian, and peasant struggles in Colombia
and Latin America since the 1980s. This demand for territory is more politicized than the previous one
for land (tierra), adding a decolonial flavor to these struggles (Beuf 2019; Escobar 1999, 225–26).
245

The new emphasis on territory in the discourse of Fisi and other members during the 1970s, as
mentioned by Pineda, may have also been motivated by the information imparted to them by Pineda and
Landaburu regarding the advocacy efforts by activists in Colombia—including missionary-linguist Paul
Witte—for state recognition of Indigenous land occupation and titling areas for exclusive Indigenous
land use (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm., October 2022). Pineda and Landaburu also actively campaigned
for this cause among Andoque members, collecting signatures and facilitating communication with State
authorities. Their efforts coincided with a fortunate turn of events when the Ministry of Agriculture
showed disinterest in the lands of the dissolved Araracuara Penal Colony, considering them too remote
from the site of Araracuara. This led to the declaration of the “Reserva Indígena Andoque de Aduche” in
1975 on the northern bank of the Caquetá River, alongside the Indigenous reserves Monochoa and
Puerto Zábalo-Los Monos (Useche Losada 1994, 174). While they were not yet recognized as legal
owners, this achievement provided the Andoque with a designated area under their disposal, which,
according to Landaburu (pers. comm., October 2022), brought them a sense of pride and increased their
sense of self-worth in relation to non-Indigenous people.
Paradoxically, the land north of the Caquetá River has never been part of the ancestral territory of any
Andoque clan, as they traditionally resided south of the Caquetá. As described in Chapter 4, the northern
bank served as a refuge zone for Andoque survivors of the genocide and became the center of rubber
extraction in following decades. Only a minority of the sites in that area carry Andoque toponyms,
which are attributed to Mnkoena’s territorial healing in the 1930s and are only loosely connected to
mythical narratives. However, today that land is also perceived as the Andoque’s ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, and the elders
engage in dialogs and negotiations to maintain connectivity and ensure conviviality between its
nonhuman dwellers and the people living or operating there.
In 1988, this reserva was upgraded to resguardo—property that is inalienable, imprescriptible and
unmortgageable. During the same year, the land south of the Caquetá was also declared resguardo: the
pluri-ethnic Indigenous Reserve Predio Putumayo, inhabited by various People of the Center. This
reserve was established on the lands previously held by the Casa Arana and purchased by the Colombian
bank Caja Agraria in 1939 after the company’s de facto expulsion during the Colombo-Peruvian
conflict. This accomplishment was the result of a struggle by Indigenous leaders, priests, and other
activists between 1986 and 1988 to persuade the President of Colombia Virgilio Barco to acquire these
lands from the bank and give them back to the Indigenous peoples whose ancestral territories they were
(Echeverri 2022, 89–90; Pineda Camacho 2015, 37–44). As a result, each Indigenous people was
246

allocated a “Special Management Zone,” although these zones have never been formally demarcated,
with some Andoque members claiming that some of the lands falling within the Special Management
Zones of their Murui-Muina, Féénemɨna, and Nonuya neighbors are part of their own ancestral territory.
One of the actors leading this struggle was the Regional Indigenous Council of Middle Amazonas
(CRIMA), a collective representative organization established in 1985. CRIMA brings together the
Andoque, Murui-Muina, Nonuyna, and Féénemɨna groups of the Araracuara sector, with the primary
aim of protecting their constitutional and international rights and advocating for the establishment and
consolidation of Indigenous territorial entities. Additionally, CRIMA also plays a role in accessing
public and private funds and implementing projects for the benefit of these peoples. Interestingly,
CRIMA’s four founders were Murui-Muina inhabitants of Araracuara whose previous work in the Penal
Colony gave them greater familiarity with state agencies and their discourse (Audren 2017, 31).
Through this organization, Andoque people have been integrated into the Colombian Indigenous
movement and its political discourse, most notably Levy, who served as CRIMA president multiple
times during the organization’s rotational leadership between ethnic groups, actively participated in the
National Organization of the Indigenous Peoples of the Colombian Amazon (OPIAC) and ran for the
position of governor of the Department of Amazonas. The Andoque also undertook campaigns to secure
land rights independently of CRIMA. In 2012, when Parques sought to obtain the free, prior, and
informed consent of neighboring Indigenous peoples for the planned expansion of the Chiribiquete
National Natural Park, the Andoque conditionally consented in exchange for the active support of the
agency in the bureaucratic process of expanding the Andoque de Aduche Reserve to lands adjacent to
the expanded park (PNN 2018, 16). The reserve’s expansion was officially declared in December 2020.
The Andoque’s involvement in campaigns to secure land rights has been influenced by previous
territorial discourse and validation of land occupation through relationships with nonhuman entities but
it has also affected the ways in which people conceive of their land and perceive their position in
relation to these entities. On the one hand, similar to other Indigenous peoples in Amazonia and beyond
(e.g., S. Hugh-Jones 2010; Kennedy 2002; Urbina Rangel 1997), mythical narratives and their
connection to the landscape are utilized to pursue land claims and are perceived as useful to achieve this
end. In a private conversation, a young man shared that their Murui-Muina, Féénemɨna, and Nonuya
neighbors had received large portions of Andoque ancestral territory because his father, a leader who
was allegedly too shy to directly address state agents, entrusted the representatives of these peoples with
Andoque myths and teachings (to which he referred as “the Andoque word” [la palabra andoque]),
247

asking them to convey it to the non-Indigenous on his behalf. However, these non-Andoque participants
later presumably appropriated Andoque sites of origin to their respective Special Management Zones
within the Predio Putumayo Reserve by presenting these stories and teachings as their own. Whether the
events unfolded as described by the young man, it is evident that members view mythical narratives as a
legitimate basis for territorial claims. For this reason, some members explained to me that during the
territorial management workshop, which included also the participation of the Nɨpóde teacher of the
community school, they had not specified the name and location of different sites, because, according to
one elder, “the Uitoto, Nonuya, and Muinane, they all publish things that they have heard among the
Andoque, and then they say that these words are theirs; they can screw us through these very stories (nos
pueden joder con estas mismas historias).”
Furthermore, many interlocutors expressed their belief that their entitlement to land is reversible and
contingent upon maintaining proper relationships with the nonhuman co-dwellers of the territory
through ceremonial dances and other rituals. Fisi told me in one mambeadero session in October 2018:
“I remember when we went to La Chorrera and President Barco [Virgilio Barco Vargas] declared the [establishment
of the] Predio Putumayo Reserve, he told us: ‘This land is yours, respect it. Live like your ancestors, take care of the
land, heal (saneen) it.81 But today we can no longer fool anyone, we no longer live like our ancestors did, we don’t
have the same thinking. The only Indian (índio) here is X, he is the only here who thinks like an Indian, and he’s not
here [X was temporarily in Bogotá for a long period for medical treatment].”

Several months later, when I accompanied Levy to visit the members of the Atta Ant Clan to update
them on the outcome of their appeal for state tutelage regarding the REDD+ project Visión Amazonía
and to persuade them to support the REDD+ project he was leading with a private company (see Chapter
14), Levy talked with the participants about the financial opportunities associated with his carbon offset
deal. He explained that by entering such a deal, they could fund a project to revitalize the Andoque
language and provide language instruction to the youth. He emphasized that the ability to speak their
native language is crucial for effectively managing the territory through spiritual dialogues with its
masters. He further warned that if they were unable to communicate with the nonhuman entities through
their native language, it could potentially lead to the revocation of the reserve declaration by the state.
While it is possible that this statement does not reflect Levy’s personal understanding of Colombian
laws concerning Indigenous reserves and was used as a persuasive argument, it was nevertheless

81

See this quote from the president’s speech in Pineda Camacho 2014, 38.

248

grounded in the assumption that his interlocutors, who ranged in age from 30 to 80 years old, held
similar convictions. The assumption that non-Indigenous powerholders and state agents share animist
views regarding the impact of ceremonial dances and rituals on the physical state of the territory was
expressed in various contexts. During the territorial management workshop, for instance, when Andoque
members were discussing their ecological calendar, Fisi expressed his objection to specifying which
ceremonial dance should be held in each season. He explained: “I don’t want the Whites coming to me
[in this or that period], saying ‘you’re a maloquero, so here, hold a dance!’” However, while the reversal
of Indigenous land titling is an unfortunate yet plausible scenario in a volatile region during a period of
ecological, economic, and political uncertainties, it can be assumed that if such reversal were to occur,
state agencies would likely rely on more naturalist criteria as grounds. Such criteria may be
unsustainable land use by Indigenous landholders or viewing language and ceremonies primarily as
reflections of ethnic identity rather than tools for spiritual territorial management. Nevertheless, in the
eyes of many members, the connectivity between the human and nonhuman components of the territory
serves as the basis for the connectivity with the state, expressed in the form of the latter’s recognition of
Indigenous territorial occupation and property rights over the land and its resources.
On the other hand, this recognition by the state, as well as the Andoque’s attempt to acquire or maintain
it, modifies their discourse regarding territory and reflects a new relationship to the land. This new
relationship demonstrates the internalization of Euro-American definitions of territory as an area of
exclusive ownership and usufruct rights by a group of people, in this case, the Indigenous people or
language group rather than clans. This group maintains a one-to-one relationship to the territory, which
shares contiguous borders with other similar (Indigenous) territories, as has been observed among North
American natives subsequent to land titling (Nadasdy 2012; Thom 2014). The notion of usufruct rights,
where the human proprietors can utilize the nonhuman elements within their property, kept resurfacing
during the territorial management workshop, as Andoque participants expressed concerns about
potential future restrictions on land use by state agencies or their dictations to adhere to a low ecological
footprint lifestyle in the name of an assumed primordial ancestral tradition. In order to assert traditional
human utilization of the land and superiority over its nonhuman co-dwellers, participants evoked the
historical ecological impact exerted by the Andoque prior to the genocide, when the Indigenous
population was significantly larger. They pointed to the remnants of past gardens evident in the vast
expanses of secondary forest (rasrtojo; tanntaǵ, literally “abandoned place”) that now cover their
ancestral territory. Nestor, for example, said:
249

“Let’s look at the land use. How they [our ancestors] used it and where? Land was used throughout the entire territory,
wherever it could be used, and people only respected the hills, in respect of the spirituality of the beings that created
them. So they respected the cananguchal[es] (inundated site[s] with mauritia palms), the area around the lake[s], but
everywhere else, they worked [there]. They never took care of the forest. Because we walk around the entire territory
and see that it is all pure rastrojo[s], you don’t see primary forest [monte firme] there, just pure cashew [trees], guacuri
[umari trees]. Only at the headwaters, next to the stream sources do you find primary forest, and along the stream
banks. They cared of the water, [we know that] because we see they didn’t fell trees there.”

The logic of a one-to-one relation between the language group and the territory is reflected in the
automatic subsumption of the territories of extinct Andoque clans under a broader pan-Andoque
territory. Grounding land claims in Western style cartography promotes a perception of territorial
boundaries from an aerial perspective, resulting in maps that contain borders based on straight aerial
lines, detached from the engaged experience with the forest environment or the intricacies of inter-clan
and inter-ethnic matrimonial land access (cf. Thom 2009; Tselouiko 2015). During an internal assembly
to discuss activities for the demarcation of borders with the Féénemina and Murui-Muina inhabitants of
the Monochoa Reserve north of the Caquetá, one elder broached the problem of land encroachment in
the territory south of the Caquetá. He warned that a family of descendants from the Andoque Toad clan,
residing in La Chorrera since the displacements of the genocide period, had settled around the
headwaters of Drawing River with the objective of reclaiming their clan’s ancestral lands. The other
participants agreed that this must be prevented, based on an implicit identification between the Andoque
territory and their reserves as the only legitimate representative political bodies for the Andoque people,
wherein individuals descended from Andoque clans can only access the reserve territory solely as
reserve members.
The idea that Indigenous territories should be contiguous and mutually exclusive became more salient in
light of carbon projects, where forest carbon in each territory must be quantified to enable the issuance
of carbon credits and prevent double counting. During my fieldwork, as news spread about Levy and his
non-Indigenous business associates in the company Yauto developing a carbon offset project on the
territories owned by the peoples represented by CRIMA that would encompass reserves on both sides of
the Caquetá, some interlocutors raised concerns over the need to officially clarify the internal ethnic
borders between the “Special Management Zones” of the Predio-Putumayo Reserve. These interlocutors
argued that large portions of land currently occupied by neighboring Murui-Muina, Nonuya and
Féénemɨna communities were actually part of the Andoque ancestral territory, which means that they
would benefit financially from forest carbon stocks belonging to the Andoque. When Yauto’s project
250

finally commenced in October 2022, following consultations with Andoque members but not those of
the Murui-Muina and Féénemɨna communities upstream from Araracuara, the company recognized the
area settled by the latter as part of the Andoque’s “Special Management Zone,” allocating the Andoque
the carbon credits corresponding to that area. Due to objections and legal actions taken by the MuruiMuina and Féénemɨna, the company and the Andoque acknowledged a territorial overlap and committed
to engaging in dialogue between the community representatives to establish a mutually agreed upon
method of benefit distribution (Bermudez Lievano 2023).
This new economic arrangement has also influenced the Andoque’s relations with sites controlled by
powerful and dangerous spirits. During my visit in July-August 2021, when private carbon offset
projects were already taking shape in the Caquetá-Putumayo region, the inhabitants of the PredioPutumayo Reserve who reside closer to the Putumayo River and were negotiating their own carbon deal,
convened an assembly of all the communities of this multi-ethnic reserve in La Chorrera to clarify their
internal borders. Upon their return to the Aduche reserve, the Andoque delegates reported a land dispute
with the Bora, who claimed ownership to Site of Tears. Although many mythical narratives are set in
this site and they have been continuously engaging in spiritual dialogue from their mambeaderos with
the spirits living there for safety and prosperity, no Andoque clan has ever settled on the site itself.
However, as part of the new economic arrangement where forest elements are perceived as resources
and generate profit without being physically extracted and risking relations with the spirits, Andoque
members began to view Site of Tears in terms of actual possession granting them exclusive usufruct.
The consideration of the territory as the exclusive possession of human beings in certain contexts and its
elements as object to be utilized by them, can be classified as “naturalist,” in contrast with the animist
perspective expressed in other contexts, where the land is perceived as possessed by various owners,
both human and nonhuman. As will be explored in Chapter 13, the Andoque exhibit a fluctuation
between treating the nonhuman co-dwellers of their land as inanimate resources in some contexts and
recognizing them as social and political agents in others. This fluctuation may reflect what Paul Nadasdy
(2021) terms “ontological indeterminacy,” borrowing the concept of indeterminacy from physics to
critique the multiple-world thesis, which assumes that different ontologies represent different realities
(see below). Indeterminacy denotes the incompatibility of experimental apparatuses that produce
different phenomena of the same but indeterminate reality, just as light can be both a wave and a
particle, depending on how it is measured. In Nadasdy’s shift from ontology to phenomenology,
nonhuman entities, such as animals, plants, and land, can be either animate or inanimate beings, either
251

social partners or natural resources, depending on the way we engage with them. This indeterminacy can
occur both at the inter-social level—when two societies differ regarding the way they perceive a given
thing—or at the individual level, as the same person can perceive a given thing as a subject or an object,
depending on context. In Nadasdy’s terms, territory is an indeterminate object for the Andoque, and can
be both the property of some humans who dispose of its nonhuman components as resources and the
connectivity between multiple classes of beings and owners. Although I do not exclude the presence of
such ontological indeterminacy in the Andoque case, I propose to interpret it as inherent to the
asymmetrical version of animism to which the Andoque subscribe, and which also becomes manifest in
their conception of territory.
Animist Asymmetries
To discuss Andoque asymmetrical animism in the context of their territorial conception and thoroughly
grapple with its dimensions of power, domination, and human superiority, it is necessary to revisit the
multiplicity of ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí territories/worlds in Andoque cosmology and draw comparisons with Viveiros de
Castro’s (1998) interlinked and predominantly symmetrical concepts of multinaturalism and
perspectivism.
As discussed in this dissertation’s introduction, Viveiros de Castro’s concepts of perspectivism and
multinaturalism are based on the common Amerindian premise that nonhuman beings possess
subjectivity commensurate with that of other species and essentially human, although species differ from
each other in their bodily forms. Every species’ body, in turn, is understood as a sign of its affects,
dispositions or capacities, “which render the body of every species unique: what it eats, how it
communicates, where it lives, whether it is gregarious or solitary, and so forth” (ibid, 478). In other
words, the body of every being is a manifestation of its relations with the various persons (and bodies) in
its environment, particularly predatory relations, as “the central dimensions, possibly even the
fundamental dimension, of perspectival inversions refers to the relative and relational statuses of
predator and prey” (ibid, 471). Although the core of ethnographic data that Viveiros de Castro’s
mobilizes for his argument concerned Indigenous conceptions of ontological translations across species
boundaries, his conceptualization expanded to the intra-human domain with the advocacy for
anthropologists to prioritize the method of translation, which accentuates the differences between the
presumably incommensurate worlds occupied by themselves and their informants (2004). This
perspectival methodology served as a theoretical starting point for proponents of the multiple-world

252

thesis. Arguing for a one-to-one relationship between people and worlds or reality, these authors assert
that different peoples inhabit distinct worlds, which may be incommensurable, particularly in the case of
Indigenous versus non-Indigenous collectives (Blaser 2009; de la Cadena 2010).
While Viveiros de Castro equates the concept of world with species-specific ontologies, the Andoque do
not consider that each species inhabits its own ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí. Similar to the Miraña (Karadimas 2005b, 293),
they classify animal worlds based on their predatory positions, such as the worlds of game animals,
ocelot stars, and birds, indicating the significance of predatory relational positions in perspectival
inversions. However, predation is not the sole principle distinguishing one world from another. As we
have observed, the distinguishing factor between worlds is their mythic origins, which determine the
prevailing relationships among their inhabitants and the domains of their owners. The division of human
beings, who typically do not prey on each other, into different worlds is based on the relational
perspective projected by each human group onto the beings in their environment, or, in other words,
how they connect with them. These humans, like the nonhumans in their worlds, are believed to have
different “origins” that shape their forms and patterns of connectivity with the other beings in their
respective worlds.
However, the aspect in relation to which the Andoque’s conception of ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí diverges most
significantly from Viveiros de Castro’s perspectivism-multinaturalism nexus is the territorial aspect,
where life in a specific land emerges as a condition to achieving a full human status. According to my
interlocutors’ statements, it is only on one’s land, where one knows the names of the owner-persons,
their domains and how to communicate with them, that one can ensure one’s own human status by
protecting oneself from predation by others who try to undermine one’s humanity. The myth of the pipeblower Uiknñemn exemplifies the close connection between a person’s human status and the land. In
this myth (M7, see Appendix 1), the hero’s mother takes him as a newborn baby to sip water from
different streams within the ancestral land—Speaking River, Sitting River, Crawling River, Standing
River, Walking River, Running River, and finally, Dancing Rod River (Ḭknsé)—to help the baby grow
quickly and be healthy.82 When I asked for further clarification about the different rivers, José*, the
narrator of the myth, said that the specific names and order of most of the streams are not crucial, and a
narrator can create any river name granted that it describes a stage of a child’s development. However,
he emphasized that the last stream on the list must be Dancing Rod River because it is through

82

This episode precedes the events narrated in a shorter version of this myth found in Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 133–41.

253

participating in ceremonial dances with a rod that a person truly becomes human. Therefore, while a
person may perceive themselves as human in general, they are fully human only within a space where
they can engage in the distinctively human cultural practice of ceremonial dance. This practice, as we
will explore in Chapter 11, epitomizes the acting upon and even controlling the interconnectedness of a
specific world. In other words, in the Andoque’s perspectivism, world and ontology are not
synonymous. Worlds should be understood as places or dimensions where ontologies are stabilized,
although these worlds may not necessarily materialize in the physical or geographical sense.83 While
game animals may see themselves as human in all environments, it is specifically within the Animals
World, encompassing various sites such as saltlicks, forest clearings, and particularly lakes and their
surroundings (which are strictly avoided for hunting or visiting), where they express their humanity to
its fullest extent. Animals are fully human in those spaces because they hold there their own ceremonial
dances to exert greater control over their destiny and ensure their reproduction.
Contrary to the assumption made by proponents of the multiple-world thesis that each individual
belongs exclusively to a particular world or reality, the Andoque’s description of overlaps between
certain worlds indicate the multiple origins of certain beings, and their corresponding ability to adhere to
multiple connectivity logics. For instance, the overlaps between the Whites World and the Worlds of the
River Source and River Mouth imply that Whites can behave based on either the predatory and
destructive nature associated with the river source, or the exchange and trading orientation linked to the
river mouth. Conversely, when one territory/world encompasses another, it conveys a more
asymmetrical logic.
As Karadimas (2013) argues for the Miraña people, the extent of the Andoque’s ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí is not
determined by that which lays outside it, as would be the case in a Western concept of territory as a
delimited space. Instead, it is defined by the center’s capacity to maintain relationships with both human
and nonhuman beings residing within it—essentially, its ability to foster connections with other centers.
Therefore, when one world encompasses another, it signifies the encompassment of one world’s origin
by another. Subsequently, the inhabitants of the former possess the ability to exert dominance over their
relationships with the inhabitants of the latter, drawing upon their familiarity with these origin myths.
This dynamic is observed in the Andoque World and the Animals World, where through ceremonial

Cf. Descola’s concept of “worlding” as “stabilization of certain things of what happens to us” (2014, 272), to which I
would add: “a stabilization of ourselves,” i.e., of the stabilizing person.
83

254

dances, the human inhabitants of the Andoque world can influence and control their interactions with the
inhabitants of the Animal World. In contrast, while the inhabitants of the Animal World perceive
themselves as humans, they lack this capability.
To reflect this asymmetry, the workshop participants dictated the following phrase to me in the last day,
to include it immediately after the description of the ancestral territory’s boundaries:
“The first word of ordering given by the Creator was: this Land of Life is for you, the People of the Axe, to be born
and live on it, use it and reproduce, under the condition that you take care of the forest and the beings living in it,
otherwise the owners of nature, whom he left in charge of the sites of origin, will punish you.”

During a mambeadero session at his maloca a few evenings later, Fisi returned to the definition of
“territory” and the position the Creator assigned to human beings within it:
Fisi: The word pḭiñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, the Whites don’t understand. They think that there, there is the life of the forest [that this
word alludes to the life of the forest]. Yes, life is there, the crops (cosecha) are there, from this we live. This does not
mean that we are not going to work there, that we cannot excavate [for clay] to prepare pots, that we cannot excavate
to get fire [gold? See Chapter 13], or the axe.
Eliran: So pḭiñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí has many meanings?
Fisi: Many! Look, when we say kahaJ́ bɵñe yatii, it means “he did it for us,” so we could live, so we could work, so
we could fish to eat, the animals he made for us to eat, fish he made for us to eat… But not to finish them all, not to
finish with the forest.”

Based on the infrequent and inconsistent use of “the Creator” (kahaǵtı̋ o) in Andoque mythology and
overall discourse, in contrast to other figures and deities, I suggest that we should not take these
statements at face value as reflecting an existing territorial asymmetry. Instead, considering our previous
discussion in Chapter 2 on the usage of the term “the Creator” by a given speaker to establish or justify
situations that are favorable to them, I suggest that we consider the evocation of “the Creator” as a
cosmopolitical tool to deliberately produce the desired territorial asymmetry. When I asked Fisi during
another conversation to clarify the statements that I had collected from him and other interlocutors
between the owner-persons of the land and those of animals, he asserted: “The owner of the land is only
one, the Creator, and it is to him that a person makes ḭtaséa [offerings] in a dance. Egret of the Center
represents him for us.” Being kahaǵtı̋ o—“that which was created for us”—the Creator is of the same
kind as ḭsu yahaǵtı̋ o, “those who were created for the animal(s),” or the owner-persons overseeing the
animals originated and living in their domains. The Creator is thus a being with an open-ended identity,
who protects the person invoking them, similar to how the animals’ owner-persons protect their own

255

personnel. At the same time, the Creator is far superior to any master of a site and of animals because he
is tiɵi, “[he] who made everything,” and is associated with the omniscient Sḭ́ di through the figure of
Doékositoɵ (see Chapter 2). The use of the term kahaǵtı̋ ɵ represents the attempt of a given individual to
tap into this potent defense and assistance through that individual’s specific origin stories. In relation to
the concept of territory, it seems that the Creator does not embody a specific entity with a fixed identity
or even a loosely defined set of attributes, whose first word of cosmic ordering was to allow the
Andoque to live, use, and reproduce on the ancestral land. Instead, the Creator should be seen as a figure
invoked whenever the Andoque wish to exert their power over the land, exploiting or harvesting animals
and plants without incurring repercussions from them and their owner-persons. This is done alongside
other techniques of mastery over nonhuman beings and to establish asymmetry in interactions with
them, which will be explored in the following chapters.
Anthropologists have observed the interconnectedness between the notions of a Creator god and those
considering concessions made to humans to utilize his creation or prey on the nonhuman beings
inhabiting the creation among Amazonian peoples as near as the Murui-Muina (García 2018, 370–74)
and as far as the Warí (Vilaça 2009; 2016). As discussed in earlier chapters, ethnographers studying the
People of the Center often interpret this interconnectedness through a moral lens, thereby attributing the
enmity of animals toward human beings to the preference given to the latter by the Creator, which, in
turn, stems from the animals’ failure to comply with the Creator’s rules (García 2018, 372–73; Griffiths
1998, 57–58; Londoño Sulkin 2005, 13). The Andoque data allow us to both distance this Indigenous
people from such generalizations and to question the exclusivity of the moral perspective in analyzing
neighboring groups. The limited presence of this figure in Andoque mythology and its meaning once it
is juxtaposed with the owner-persons of animals indicate that for this people, the Creator is not simply a
mythological figure who established human superiority over nonhumans. Instead, it functions as a figure
of speech to articulate and cultivate this superiority, seeking to prevent symmetry in the generalized
predation within the land and ensuring the encompassment of the Animals World and other worlds of
nonhumans or potentially hostile beings by the Andoque’s pḭiñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí. The invocation of the Creator
emphasizes that every form of connectivity, including that of ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, is perceived from the perspective
of a specific being who seeks to assert their dominance and encompass competing perspectives within it.
Finally, it is important to note that the territory is not homogenous in relation of its susceptibility to
being dominated by human beings or recognizing their superior position. This can be inferred from
people’s explanations of the two kinds of proto-human beings who named the streams and other sites in
256

different parts of the territory: the Shadows (Ká’hɵi síɵ́hɵ) and the Piercers (Yɒ’nnkn). The Shadows
inhabited the inland areas around Site of Tears, away from the main rivers, and gave names to the
smaller streams and sites in those regions. By contrast, the Piercers lived in the part of the territory
bordering the Caquetá River and named the streams flowing into the Caquetá and the sites along them.
People tend to speak more about the Piercers, likely because they currently inhabit the same area as
these quasi-mythical beings, where the latter left visible traces in the form of petroglyphs, showcasing
their extraordinary ability to pierce hard materials like stone or wood with their bare hands. Another
possible explanation may be the association between the Piercers and significant feats that benefit
people today, such as “healing” the territory by stripping various nonhuman beings—beings which they
would subsequently depict in their petroglyphs—of the primordial forces they possessed in the past, and
discovering the stone axes linked to productivity and economic autonomy. The Piercers were more
similar to nowadays humans than the Shadow People, and the animals into which they transformed—
predominantly white lipped-peccaries—resemble human groups in both organization and ferocity. The
Shadows, on the other hand, transformed into small and mostly harmless animals like opossums or
crickets, making it tempting to associate them with Shadow Egg, who headed such small animals when
he was the maloquero of these “people” in the center. The Shadows did not leave visible marks on the
landscape, and in the stories about them, referred to as “jokes” (chiste), and which are neither serious
like the “Captaincy Stories” nor dangerous like the “Animal Stories,” they engage in nonsensical
actions. In a joke-story recounted to me by several interlocutors and recorded by Landaburu and Pineda
(1984, 217–24), the Shadows attempt to capture the moon, mistaking its reflection (ká’hɵi) in the water
for the celestial body itself. The Shadows do not directly impact reality but rather act upon its images,
much like how a shadow projected from a person or object depends on them without altering their state.
Similarly, the Shadows did not modify or intervene in the state of persons and things as the Piercers did,
who could pass through them, creating or destroying them.
Based on the fact that the Piercers are said to have operated in an area that the Andoque approached only
in relatively recent times, while the Shadows lived where Andoque clans resided in the more distant
past, I suggest that the narratives about the Piercers were developed during the expansion or movement
of Andoque clans towards the Caquetá. These narratives reflect the Andoque’s increasing engagement in
trade with non-Indigenous merchants, allowing them to exert greater control over their territory and
assert superiority over its nonhuman co-dwellers. At the same period, the sites inland, away from the

257

Caquetá River, continued to bear names given by weaker beings who could not shape the territory in the
same manner.
This hypothesis provides another example of how the Andoque’s notions of human domination over the
land and its nonhuman co-dwellers not only coexists with their animist ontology but also stem from it,
drawing upon its inherent tendency for asymmetry while further deepening this inclination. The
discussion in this chapter regarding the agents operating within the ancestral territory, encompassing
both human and nonhuman entities, both Andoque clans and non-Indigenous people, as well as the
persistent pursuit of asymmetry that permeates their interactions, will guide us in our exploration of the
relationships between human and nonhuman centers in the subsequent chapters, as well as the dynamics
between the Andoque center and the non-Indigenous “river mouth” in Part IV.

258

Chapter 9. Power in Human-Nonhuman Relations
Having explored, in the preceding chapter, the concept of ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, and analyzed, in Parts I and II, the
notion of center and its reliance on appropriated power from the river source, this chapter addresses the
following question: How is power exercised in relationships between the human and nonhuman centers
that constitute ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí? The chapter offers a panoramic view of these relationships, demonstrating how
symmetric schemes of predation turn into asymmetric relations of familiarization and mastery. After
examining predation by humans in the form of hunting and fishing, we will discuss how nonhumans
prey on humans and transform them into their kin through illnesses, accidents, and other ailments. We
will then explore how people counter such attempts of familiarizing predation by nonhumans, and how
they form mastery relations that enable them to align the powers of nonhuman pets to their own for
various shamanic purposes, particularly sorcery and healing. An important dimension of domination
explored here is one’s ability to incorporate others into one’s reality, a key version of which in the
Amazonian context is familiarization. Throughout the chapter, I examine how various faculties and
actions such as odors, sexual self-restraint, symbolization, and consciousness, contribute to this
incorporation or assist in resisting it, thus elucidating some nuances of the native notion of power.
Additionally, I demonstrate how the hierarchical version of their animism aids the Andoque in managing
perilous interactions with nonhumans. They achieve this by manipulating the agency of game animals
and transforming homosubstitutive-cannibalistic exchanges into heterosubstitutive ones involving
vegetal substances.
Predation by Humans
As in other parts of Amazonia, the Andoque’s protein intake depends on seasonally varying ratios
between hunting and fishing. Most Andoque members, except for the Sun Clan, state that their pregenocide ancestors, who lived in the hinterland away from the main rivers, mainly consumed tinamou,
curassow and guan (Cracidae family), paca (Cuniculus paca), acouchi (Myoprocta pratti), and agouti
(Dasyprocta sp.), along with small stream fish. Conversely, larger game, like white-lipped peccary
(Tayassu pecari), collared peccary (Dicotyles tajacu), tapir (Tapirus terrestris), deer (Mazama sp.),
armadillo (Dasypus kappleri), and monkeys (especially the woolly monkey [Lagothrix lagothrica]),
were hunted less frequently, primarily for ceremonial dances. While in pre-genocide times the Andoque
used various techniques to hunt land animals, from blowpipes with curare-dipped darts and (scarce)
rifles, to dogs, different traps, burrow smoking, and collective clubbing (battue), rifles are currently the

259

most widely employed technique, alongside occasional hunting with dogs, and trapping rodents in the
garden. Since rifle ammunition costs COP$8,000-10,000 (roughly €1.5-2) per bullet in Puerto Santander,
it is more cost-effective to hunt larger game (paca and larger), than small rodents and birds, especially
since larger game is often sold to settlers in the village.84
Another set of techniques essential for hunting birds and mammals relate to what Rane Willerslev terms
“mimetic empathy,” which refers to the hunter’s ability to imagine himself in the game animal’s
position, reproducing the animal’s perspective (2007, 106–10). These techniques vary from tracing
game through footprints, bitten fruits, and other physical signs, to erotic and emotional strategies,
whereby hunters relate to animals as persons, imitating the voices of females in heat or young in distress
to draw male or parent animals within shooting range or to make them freeze for the moment required to
hit them.85 This seduction works both ways and terrestrial animals and their owner-persons employ the
same stratagems to prey on humans, as we will see below. The appropriative dimension of hunting and
fishing, whereby external beings of an affinal nature are familiarized (Fausto 1999; 2007a), and their
material essence becomes part of the hunter’s essence, and, by extension, the essence of the human
group, is expressed through the reference to game as ósía: “that which is mine,” similar to how one’s
body (osí) is what one owns, their real essence (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm., October 2022; cf. Stolze
Lima 1996, 38). The verb ḭsía is normally used only to refer to faunal victims, including fish, while
killing both people and animals is also denoted through the root bu’, which literally means “destroy, tear
down, uproot,” and can also be employed in relation to plants and inanimate things. The possibility of
communication with terrestrial and aviary game also manifests in people’s avoidance of using such
explicit terms before the animal is actually killed, due to these animals and their owner-persons’ ability
to hear people’s intentions from a distance. Therefore, Andoque hunters hide such intentions, telling
others that they are simply “going wandering” (andar; yo̰nfɵi), a practice evidenced in other Amazonian
societies (e.g., Walker 2013, 171–72).

For more information on the Andoque and their Murui-Muina neighbors’ hunting techniques, see García 2018, 254–56,
and Pineda Camacho 1982, 40–43. See the latter source (pp. 35–38) also for information on the gathering of smaller fauna,
such as frogs and larvae, which I do not discuss here.
85
For the importance of such techniques among other Amazonian peoples and their association with an erotic relation
between hunters and game animals see Descola 1994, 237 and Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971, 218–22. However, I have not
encountered among my Andoque interlocutors a similar attitude to that recorded by Reichel-Dolmatoff, where the Desana
hunter aims to contribute to forest animals’ reproduction by sexually arousing them during hunting expedition (ibid, 222).
This attitude seems to be related to the Tukanoan inclination toward reciprocal affinal exchange with animals, as opposed to
the People of the Center’s tendencies toward generalized predation.
84

260

Since fish do not normally share the space with humans, oblique references to killing are less strictly
observed before fishing. This activity provides the larger part of Andoque members’ protein intake,
which consists of fish such as the pintadillo catfish (Pseudoplatystoma sp.) and smaller species, such as
the ray finned Anostomidae (homima), the sábalo and sabaleta (both are Brycon sp.), etc. These fish are
caught in Macaw River and its affluents, and sometimes the Caquetá, using canes and hooks, nets,
harpoons, static lures in flooded areas in the wet season, and occasionally stream poisoning with
barbasco plants in the dry season. Larger fish from the Caquetá, such as the catfish Brachyplatystoma
filamentosum, Brachyplatystoma flavicans, and Phractocephalus hemiliopterus, are caught with nets,
longlines, and harpoons, but while they are sometimes consumed by the Andoque, they are more often
sold to fish merchants who sell them in Bogotá.86 Non-shamanic communication with fish and other
aquatic animals such as river turtles for predatory purposes is restricted to luring them through baits of
fruits or other fish due to their aquatic habitat. Andoque members’ preference for small fish over big
ones, and especially game animals (birds and mammals), owes in part to the relative abundance of fish,
which makes fishing a more reliable source of food than hunting. It is rare for a man to return from
fishing completely empty-handed, which is not the case for hunting, where it is more common (resulting
in the hunter’s resort to fishing on his way back home). However, this preference is also related to the
Andoque’s perception of hierarchy among nonhuman beings and the graded agency that allows each
species to prey on humans, as I will explain below.
The Ambivalence of Predation
Animals are regarded as dangerous, inimical beings. Tañe explained to me once as we were getting
ready for a forest excursion: “Walking in the forest is no game. You must be fierce as you go [andar con
rabia], and when you see an animal, you must kill it; kill it and eat it, so that other animals will be
afraid.”87 Animals are “deviators,” yoíkóɵ, in that they cause people to lose their minds and engage in
socially unacceptable behavior—a “false” behavior, as opposed to a “proper” (ḭdɨ) human one—and
become something (or somebody) they should not be, thereby preventing them from realizing their
human potential culminating in the social reproduction of the human group. The deviation of humans
from their core (dɨ) by nonhumans can take different forms, from confusion and disorientation while
hunting to undesired effects of consuming game to more proactively predatory actions. These actions by

86
87

For more information on fishing in the Caquetá, see Rodríguez Fernández 1991.
Cf. people’s avoidance to consume animals that approach a settlement mentioned below.

261

animals are seen as expressions of the brujería (“sorcery”) of animals and their guardian spirits—or, in
Andoque, their tne’túi—their auxiliary spirit depending on connection with Sı̰ ́di. While these actions are
sometimes attributed to animals’ anger and jealousy of humans whose creation as speaking beings
stripped the former of the ability to speak, in other times they are explained as analogous to human’s
engagement in hunting. They are seen as animals’ ways to defend themselves from predation, take
revenge for such predation, and guarantee the reproduction of their own species by appropriating others
(namely, humans) and integrating them into their society, even in cases where animals’ bodies are
consumed by humans. Like affinal alliance, predation is symmetrical, and the hunter or eater who
wishes to incorporate the game into their body and society runs the risk of being controlled by the game
and incorporated into its society (Fausto 2007a, 505–6)—hence the importance of introducing
asymmetries by “familiarizing predation.” In what follows we explore animals’ strategies to oppose and
invert predation, starting with sabotaging hunting expeditions.
Confusion while hunting can cause hunters to mistake their human companions for the game they are
looking for, leading them to shoot them instead of the desired target. Disorientation can occur when a
hunter becomes too focused on a specific animal, such as a monkey fleeing in the canopy, and forgets to
monitor the location of the sun, which is usually used as a reference point in the forest. Here mythology
proposes edifying precedents, in the form of the two Andoque variations along the vertical axis of
predation on the figure of a powerful father-in-law unwilling to give his daughter away: Shadow Egg
and Sun. As we have seen in several myths (M1; M3; M14), and based on game animals’ strategy to use
camouflage to avoid predation, Shadow Egg conceals his people from predation by the son-in-law, who
wishes to use them as game or raw materials, by tricking him into thinking they are human. Shadow Egg
overcomes his sons-in-law by transforming them into “useless” beings (yoóka ibañe nyatii) who are “out
of order” (yoó) in the double sense of the phrase, as they both act outside the norm, and do not achieve
the desired results. The competition over knowledge and perception between Shadow Egg and his sonsin-law is expressed through the verb dú’ha, which can mean both dominating and mocking someone
(Andoque Andoque and Landaburu, forthcoming), and which my interlocutors interpret in this context
also as avoiding falling into their trap. In contrast, Sun preys on his sons-in-laws overtly (e.g., M15;
M6). When walking in the forest, hunters should follow the example of this ultimate predator rather than
Shadow Egg’s ruses. In M3 and M1, the egret figures dominate Shadow Egg and his daughter by not
regarding the various entities they encounter in the woods as real humans, but as raw materials. This

262

domination involves one’s capacity to assume a predatory stance vis-à-vis the other and incorporate
them into one’s reality, as opposed to being deceived by the other and incorporated into their reality.
However, a person who overhunts is more likely to become confused or lost while hunting, and may
even encounter extraordinary phenomena, such as animals that do not die after being shot, speaking
animals (a man who had hunted too many white-lipped peccaries reported hearing a peccary telling him
“Do not bother me anymore”), or an animal ceremonial dance—an incident Tañe related to me in the
first person. According to him, one night some thirty years ago, during a period when he was hunting
tapirs in large numbers in the saltlick near Tar Waterfall to send money to his son studying in Leticia, he
shot an extremely large, white-eyed tapir (“like a horse”) that was not disturbed by the gunshot.
Immediately after, he started hearing people talk around him—all those who have been “enchanted” (se
encantaron) in previous generations, transforming into nonhuman spirits and remaining there. He
refrained from looking at them, but rather ran away, terrified by the tapir diablo. Three years later, he
returned there at night, climbed a high hunting post, and waited for a tapir when he suddenly heard
people heavily stomping beneath him, but did not see anything. Upon descending from his post, a
terrible smell hit him. “The devil is going to change my body (cambiar el cuerpo) with this smell,” he
told himself. Breathing with his flashlight attached to his nostrils to avoid that smell, he escaped the
saltlick without looking at the place from which the voices were coming, because “The tapirs wanted to
change my sight (cambiar la vista).” The next morning, he saw tapir footprints at the saltlick and
realized that he had indeed witnessed a tapir ceremonial dance. From then on, he cut down on his
hunting activity. Such apparitions are usually taken as warnings to the hunter before the animals and
their owner-persons take more destructive measures to prey on him and on his family members,
familiarizing them by aligning their bodies and perspectives with those of nonhumans. However, they
are also ḭtannéso (“[transformation into] something of bones”), which, as discussed in Chapter 7,
represents an existing state of affairs, in this case—the already altered state of the hunter. The hunter’s
ability to understand animal speech and perceive their dances is an indication that he is drifting away
from the human society and is on his way to assimilate to the animal’s society, that he is being
transformed (ti) into an animal.
The other actions undertaken by animals to deviate people from their human core, such as illnesses,
madness, death, accidents, conflicts, and other afflictions, represent further extents of familiarization by
nonhumans, which I will examine below. However, before delving into these actions, it is crucial to
consider M18, which vividly portrays the continuity between people’s predation on animals and
263

animals’ familiarization of humans. This myth, as detailed in Appendix 1, serves as a cautionary tale on
the dangers of excessive hunting in everyday situations and is one of the stories on which the Head
ceremonial dance draws. The myth recounts how the affinal relatives of a dance organizer undertook a
hunting expedition for white-lipped peccaries prior to the dance. They captured an entire herd with a big
net, killed them, ate some, and smoked the rest, except for one severed head. A hunter, preferring to eat
a tinamou, observed from a distance an old man named Ka’ákɵpidɨ who was using his own eyes as a
substitute for fibers to weave a basket, and decided to spend the night on a tall tree branch. At night, he
watched the old man remove his fellow hunters’ eyes and throw them into the basket. When the men
woke up, the blind hunters followed the survivor to the celebratory maloca, where they received tobacco
paste, mambe, and manicuera, and then continued back into the forest. They gradually transformed into
peccaries through vegetal materials that their captain attached to their bodies or that became stuck to
them during their journey in the forest and upriver. Their transformation was completed when, upon
reaching Faukuyadeefɵ (Forest of “Faukuya,” a bird of the Tyrannidae family; also planet Jupiter
[Andoque Andoque and Landaburu, forthcoming]), the hero Usiñémn attached grape-like (unidentified)
piyɒdɨkni fruits to their eye sockets, endowing them with new eyes.
Fisi, who told me the version summarized here, did not clarify whether the herd captain is the survivor
who preferred tinamou over peccary and climbed a tree or the raw peccary head. It may, in fact, be a
case of dual captaincy, as the two seem to be transformations of each other, as hinted by another version,
narrated to me by Raquel (8/7/19)—who learned it, in turn, from Hóñoéna̰i (“A beautiful Spix’s Guan
pet”; Alejandro, a genocide survivor). In this version, one of the hunters was scolded by his fellows at
the beginning of the story for scaring away the peccaries by shooting at them with a blowpipe, a useful
weapon for hunting monkeys and birds (such as the tinamou) but useless for large game, including
peccaries. “They’re angry with me because they don’t know that the peccaries will never be finished,”
he thought and left the hunters’ group, joined the fleeing herd (supposedly under a peccary guise), and
led it back to where he had been scolded by his fellows. At night, he weaved a net (dʉʉ́kn) from
chambira leaves (tɵkóñe; Astrocaryum chambira) by tying the chambira fibers to the sleeping peccaries’
legs, and then called the other people to kill them, which they happily did. Another man who went to
take a bath at dusk saw the elder Ka’ákɵpidɨ weaving a basket, and at night he saw him collecting the
other hunters’ eyes in it. Since the scolded hunter led the peccaries to their place of slaughter and then
disappeared from Raquel’s narrative, it is tempting to see him as the peccary whose cut off head was left
raw, away from the fireplace, in her version as well. The idea that the raw peccary head led the blind
264

people to the dance would thus reflect a perfect reversal, where the person scolded by his group for
shooting one animal leads his group to become a group of animals. In both versions, then, massive
hunting or consumption by humans of agentive animals (peccaries) leads to humans’ transformation into
those game animals, whereas hunting or consuming a single, less agentive animal (the tinamou) allows
the hunter to either remain human or to maintain his agency, a faculty whose unequal distribution among
beings distinguishes humans from game animals, as we shall see below.
This myth bears resemblance to Mundurucu and Kayapó-Kubenkranken myths of the origin of meat that
Lévi-Strauss analyzed, where the tinamou hunter is the one who transforms people into collared or
white-lipped peccaries (1964, 93–94). Although in these and other myths of meat origin the tinamou
hunter and other heroes transform their brothers-in-law into peccaries to dispose of their meat (ibid, 92–
105), in the two Andoque versions the hunters (who are wife-givers) are not transformed into peccaries
by their brother-in-law, although their brothers-in-law in the wider sense—namely, present-day maloca
owners—end up disposing of their meat at the Head dances they organize. Not only did the maloquero
brother-in-law not transform the hunters into game in the Andoque version, in Raquel’s narrative, upon
her brothers’ arrival at the dance, the maloquera—an extension of her husband—served them manicuera
to reverse their transformation, but there was not enough beverage for all of them. Those who drank
manicuera regained their sight and became fully human again, while those who did not drink it ran away
into the forest as peccaries. Rather than a reflection on the dynamics between two human brothers-inlaw, the Andoque myth—that today serves as a cautionary tale to warn against excessive killing of any
species by either an individual or a group—states the symmetry of meta-affinal relations between people
and their potential nonhuman affines. The expression of this symmetry through white-lipped peccaries is
of course not accidental. As elsewhere in Amazonia, white-lipped peccaries “offer a model for the
generic human condition itself: they are not purely predators but mortals who are preyed upon and
defend themselves bravely, live in groups, eat manioc, and possess a chief” (Fausto 2007, 507; see also
Gow 2001, 68). To this we can add, in the Andoque case, the idea that the head of a peccary herd, who
parallels human captains in leading its herd in the woods and warns them of predator attacks, is usually
red faced or, in the minority of cases, white faced (cf. Stolze Lima 1996, 23)—just like the uneven
Andoque division of captaincy into “red” and “white” specializations (see Chapter 11).
Stolze Lima (1996) based her analysis of Amerindian perspectivism on the Juruna’s perception of whitelipped peccaries and their collective peccary hunting, arguing that this confrontation is in fact a struggle
between two points of view. While humans perceive this confrontation as asymmetrical hunting,
265

peccaries perceive it as symmetrical war in which they aim to capture their human potential affines,
who, once dead, would join the peccary society (ibid; see also S. Hugh-Jones 2019, 109–10; Karadimas
2005, 344–45). A person’s death in such a confrontation represents the slipping of hunting into war, as
he assumes the peccaries’ perspective on reality (Stolze Lima 1996, 38). Here it is important to recall
that the hunters’ transformation into peccaries begins when they are stripped of their eyes and completes
once they are given new eyes. The equivalence between the human and peccary societies thus results in
the complete incongruence of their perspectives and the outward manifestations of their actions. Unlike
human beings who form groups to enforce discipline and maintain social and territorial order, whitelipped peccary herds are notorious for their lack of respect toward other persons and the disorder they
leave behind, reflected in the poor state in which they leave saltlicks, and which makes other animals
refrain from going there, to the great detriment of Andoque hunters. The Andoque’s perception of
human-peccary incongruence culminates in the Head Dance, which requires guests to bring peccaries
hunted collectively with nets. As in the Juruna tale where the shaman “invites” peccaries to a human
dance as game, rather than dancers (ibid, 23), the Head Dance represents a moment in which one society
(the human one) practices and intensifies its collective agency while another (the peccary society)
experiences collective grief, signaling and actualizing its loss of agency.
The preparation of the net to capture the peccaries from chambira leaves in Raquel’s version emphasizes
the equivalence and incongruence between humans and peccaries. Chambira is also used for weaving
baskets, like the one used by the peccary master to capture humans through their eyes. A basket consists
solely of chambira and eyes, as its interstices are called tuákɵ, which literally means “round eye.” The
capacity of these two woven instruments to contain things but also to let them pass through their holes
relates to the container-contained dialectics of familiarizing predation and mastery, which represents the
asymmetric dimension of the latter. As with the ambivalence of Amazonian mastery, which “contains
the seeds of directional inversion” because the master contains, feeds, and protects a pet that retains an
agency and can thus, in turn, overcome him or her (Costa and Fausto 2019, 214, the emphasis is mine;
see also Costa 2010), the predator contains its prey within its body, but can itself fall prey to that which
it contains. The predator runs the risk of being consumed by their prey and, ultimately, to be contained
by the latter’s society as long as the former does not achieve the impossible task of completely
familiarizing their prey by entirely extinguishing the latter’s affinal otherness (Fausto 1999, 949; Costa
2010, 16 n.14). The versatility of chambira allows for the containment of peccaries and their human

266

predators, emphasizing these dialectics. As we shall presently see, these dialectics are also at play in the
predation of humans by nonhumans through the game the former consume.
Predation by Nonhumans
The consumption of game can have a range of undesired effects, from temporary symptoms like fatigue,
stomach aches, and diarrhea, to permanent physical conditions such as skin disease and negative
behavioral dispositions. In the past, youth were reportedly advised to avoid certain foodstuffs, such as
the pacarana, the skin of furry animals, the water used to cook armadillo meat, or the kɵrɵfe catfish
(Pimelodus sp.). The beliefs regarding eating these foodstuffs betray the idea that a person may
physically resemble the animal he or she eats: eating a pacarana, a rodent with a dark body dotted in
white stains, would make the eater become grey-haired; eating the skin of a furry animal would make
the eater feel incessantly cold and in constant need to cover themselves, like that animal; drinking stock
consisting of the vitality of an animal living in burrows in the ground would make the drinker fear to
advance in the opposite direction, i.e., climbing up trees, and eating the “narrow-waist” kɵrɵfe catfish
would make birth difficult and dangerous for pregnant women.
In addition to the risk of physical assimilation, the substances of animal bodies are also considered toxic.
Animals’ owner-persons are believed to have infused the bodies of different species they created with
worms and other pathogens to infest (ɨkóá) the bodies of their eaters, who would maintain their appetite
but instead of gaining weight, they would become thin, weak, and their bodies and minds devitalize.
These pathogens may also contaminate the eater’s body, causing physical and mental diseases, amoral
and asocial dispositions, and a propensity toward conflicts and accidents.
Animal bodies are also considered toxic because of their daily habits, as they take on the smell of
whatever and whoever they eat. “What you Whites call ‘contamination,’ we call ‘smell’ (olor)” said
Mario, explaining that the smell of the fruits, plants, insects, and fish each animal eats suffuses its flesh
and blood, and, in turn, suffuses the bodies of those consuming that animal. The smell (ɵpo̰ ̰ó ) registers
the predatory history and, thus, the predatory potential of each being, serving as a sensory expression of
its agency—consisting, in turn, of the agencies (smells) of the beings it has consumed—and ability to
make others consubstantial with itself. As among the Miraña (Karadimas 2005b, 220), the musk scent
(séa, the same as the odor emitted from a human being’s sweat glands) of certain land animals flags
them as more prejudicial to human health. Such are white-lipped peccaries, which, contrary to most
terrestrial game animals consumed by the Andoque, are omnivorous not herbivorous, and whose dorsal

267

musk glands hunters usually cut off before bringing this game home to prevent this smell from spreading
to human abodes. In contrast with the majority of hunted land animals, most fish consumed by the
Andoque eat other fish and non-vegetal matter, and sick people express disgust of eating them,
attributing this disgust to their smell, which can aggravate their vulnerable condition. People are more
attentive to the smell of fish they catch in the Caquetá after human drownings to avoid eating fish
containing human smell and dangerous agency if they have directly or indirectly fed on the corpse. As a
marker of a given being’s identity that emanates from that being to other beings and across species, it is
not surprising that po̰ ̰ó serves as one of the terms for comparing and pointing to similarity between
different entities (Landaburu 1979, 174).88 As Karadimas (2013, 197–99) notes considering Miraña
notions of odor, smell marks each being’s temporary territory as well as the porosity of physical borders
like the skin or palisades, as odor from one being assimilates to other beings’ odors or emanates to them
and imposes itself on them. Therefore, apart from nutrition, a given being’s odor and related ability to
act on others through it also depends on its cohabitation and contact with other beings. As among the
Miraña (Karadimas 2005b, 354–58), human and nonhuman beings can borrow from trees their
ñe’pɵ́kn—different aromatic herbs and other perfumes of vegetal origin—to prey on others by seducing
them or defend themselves from such seductive predation by others. It is this contagious—or
predatory—quality of odors that explains Tañe’s fear in the saltlick that night: “The devil is going to
change my body with this smell.” His attempt to smell only his flashlight, which, after prolonged use,
must have taken the smell of his hands, resonates with Karadimas’ interpretation of Miraña men’s turn
of the twentieth century custom to carry aromatic herbs in their apron for protection from external
aggressions propagated by odors (Karadimas 2013, 198): in the absence of such herbs, concentrating on
absorbing one’s own smell can counter one’s absorption by foreign smells. It also resonates with the
practice reported to me by Fisi one morning at his maloca, which involves forcefully rubbing one’s
wrists against each other and smelling them after waking up from an ominous dream so that the negative
event would go somewhere else. One’s body odor seems to “ground” one to one’s own body, of which
the agents appearing in dreams may try to take possession, thereby safeguarding one from
disadvantageous exchanges with such agents. Beyond the many connotations of the concept “center”
explored in Part I, we can add this one—it is also olfactory.

the other term, móna̰, may be related to mo̰no̰—aspect, form, and consciousness—but this relation is not as clear as in
po̰ ̰ó ’s case (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm., July 2022).
88

268

The Andoque perceive an agentive hierarchy among nonhuman beings, which is also influenced by the
scent emitted by different species but is generally based on a correlation between each species’ relative
position in the food chain and body size and that species’ ability to prey on and familiarize its eaters
through disease, other misfortunes, and, ultimately, death. Cultivated plants are understandably the least
dangerous to humans as they are grown by them, followed by forest trees, whose ñe’pɵ́kn cause people
respiratory problems and headaches. Trees, however, preserve the more potent yet invisible anaconda
agency that they had before the mythical hero Tofidei turned his anaconda enemies into trees (see M23
below), hence tree crushing accidents while clearing forest plots or during windstorms are seen as their
willful aggressions against humans.89 Small fish are the least dangerous among fauna, while bigger fish
from the Caquetá can cause different skin disease or oral candidiasis (sapito; yo’fí) to the eater’s child.
Game animals are more dangerous, with large mammals considered proactively aggressive. As human
smell is said to repel such animals, a deer, tapir, peccary, or cabybara (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris)—
and, understandably, a jaguar—that draws near a settlement or its gardens should be killed but not eaten,
as it is considered to be sent by a sorcerer to harm that settlement’s dwellers, or to contain toxins in its
body, with the aim of being consumed by the dwellers to make them fall ill (the meat can nonetheless be
sold to others). This can also happen to a person who has hunted too much, to whom game animals start
approaching on their own volition, to transmit to him and his family members the diseases residing in
their bodies and assimilate these humans to their nonhuman society.90 Such graded agency, evidenced
among other Amazonian societies (e.g., Fausto 2007, 503; S. Hugh-Jones 2019, 104; Lucas 2019, 407),
points to an often-neglected hierarchical dimension of Amazonian animism, which also sets the stage for
different actors, including human ritual specialists, to practice ontological maneuvers for manipulating
the agency of others.
Like the Tukanoans (S. Hugh-Jones 2019a, 104), Andoque members consume fish and animals higher
on the hierarchy according to their stage in life: small children should ideally only eat small fish, fruits
and tubers, larvae, and ants, while birds, turtles, larger fish, and mammals are added to their diet as they
grow older.91 The age at which a child can be given the meat of large mammals such as peccary, deer, or

For similar Muinane and Murui-Muina conceptions, see Londoño Sulkin 2000, 350–51 and Griffiths 1998, 100–103.
These ideas have also been articulated with Colombian folk beliefs concerning the dangers of engaging in different
activities during the Holy Week (Semana Santa), as people say that game easily captured during that week is likely to
transmit aches and diseases to its consumers.
91
The preference for feeding small children with vegetal-source food is evident today also in the popularity of oat shakes for
toddlers. This practice is also due to the state’s distribution of such products as part of the packages for nutritional security
for early childhood by the Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar, some of which are received by Andoque families.
89
90

269

tapir, which are the most dangerous game, varies among interlocutors, from five to eight years old.
Introducing any new kind of fish or meat to a child must be accompanied by that foodstuff’s spiritual
decontamination by the father, grandfather, or another elder, who transubstantiates the meat into a
harmless fruit by curing chili which he hands the mother to eat with the fish, thereby reducing the fish’s
agency by naming it after that fruit (cf. Fausto 2007, 504, especially the citation of Overing 1975, 89).
This ontological manipulation allows the eater to familiarize the animal and use its vitality to magnify
his or her own personality, rather than being familiarized by it.
The specific fruit to which each animal can be transformed is the fruit associated with that animal in
mythology and considered one of that animal’s multiple origins, as every species and human clan have
more than one origin. In the case of animals, their vegetal origin is one of the possible forms in which
they can be represented in dreams (see Appendix 5). For Andoque interlocutors, for example, peach
palm fruits stand for peccaries, sugar cane stands for homima fish, avocado represents the silky anteater
(Cyclopes didactylus), and mocambo (Theobroma bicolor) represents one paca species (and possibly the
pacarana, Dinomys branickii whose speckled fur reminds that fruit [Karadimas 2005, 347]).92 The fruit
form is the docile, safer form in which an animal can appear, the way it is perceived by its site-person. A
man crossing Tar Waterfall (Pɨdadíe) on Macaw River for hunting can offer coca powder and tobacco
paste to Lady Tar Flower (Pɨdataikn, also called Boɵtadíeikn, “Lady Splashing Water”), the site-person,
alluding to his poverty, to which the master may reply: “I have pineapple (armadillo), plantain (collared
peccary), mocambo (paca/pacarana), caimito (tapir), peach palm fruit (white-lipped peccary), and inga
beans (?), have some!” (Pineda Camacho 1982, 39; my translation; the site-person’s name in Andoque is
my addition).
As observed in Appendix 5, the other form in which animals can appear in dreams is as human beings,
most commonly a violent man or a seductive woman. Dreaming of fruits is considered an indication of
healthful game, whereas dreaming of people is an indication of dangerous meat, whose consumption
may result in disease or different aches. The Murui-Muina interpret this duality of game representations

The Andoque key for dream interpretation coincides in some cases, but differs in others, from the Murui-Muina key
registered by Candre-Kinerai and Echeverri (2008, 58–63), and the Miraña key registered by Karadimas (2005, 347–48). It
must be noted that these few examples are provided for demonstrative purposes only and should not be taken as the ultimate
key for Andoque dream interpretation, as some interlocutors differ regarding the interpretation of several dream symbols, like
caimito, which represents tapir for some and white-lipped peccary for at least one knowledgeable person. People demonstrate
general flexibility in dream interpretation (see Chapter 7 and Appendix 5), and as I only interviewed on this theme the
members of the eight households in which I stayed during fieldwork, I do not preclude the possibility that other Andoque
members may contest the few examples provided here.
92

270

through a combination of moral and strategic principles. They ask their auxiliary spirit before sleep to
dream of fruits so they can distinguish “legitimate victims”—which are the “delinquent” members of
their groups whose killing would not be avenged by their masters—from “illegitimate” ones whose
killing can be severely avenged (García 2018, 273–74; Griffiths 1998, 204). For the Andoque, however,
it is the strategic principle that dominates. Much like the Miraña (Karadimas 2005b, 347–48), they do
not see the dream symbols of fruit and humans as a moral dichotomy between rightful and wrongful
targets, but rather as a distinction between the unprotected, like orphans, and those belonging to a
maloca’s lineage. As previously mentioned, a hunter may petition Sı̰ ́di, “Give me your orphans.”
Animals depicted as cultivated fruits are likened to the orphans of their owner-person (ño̰), as they are
the alienable possessions of that entity, who would not seek vengeance for their loss. They are Sı̰ ́di’s
orphans in the sense of being Sı̰ ́di-less: they lack a personhood (ño̰) element and are dissociated from a
predatory agency. Conversely, the appearance of game animals as humans in dreams indicates their
agency and potential to cause harm. Unlike the docile orphans that can be freely given away as fruits,
these animals are akin to a maloquero’s consanguine kin, whose harm he would vengefully redress.
Hence, these animals are perceived as persons imbued with the personhood and agency of their ownerperson (this does not imply that all individuals avoid the risks associated with hunting and consuming
such creatures).
The relatively safe status of fish manifests also in the fact that most fish are represented in dreams as
fruits and other vegetal elements (such as the balsa tree, from whose chips Moon created some fish
[Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 49–50]), and only other, mostly dangerous aquatic animals (river turtle,
caiman, anaconda, dolphin, etc.) and a few big fish, like the catfish Brachyplatystoma filamentosum,
appear as humans. In contrast with dreams on land animals, which are commensurate with humans, the
actions taken by fish in dreams do not predict analogous actions by humans, and for some people fishing
in dreams represents a monetary gain. Neither does killing humans in dreams predict catching fish;
rather, it is a dream about stealing inanimate things from others that augurs a bountiful fish yield. The
fact that fish do not share a terrestrial existence with humans also renders them less likely to proactively
attack humans, except for dolphins, for reasons that will be discussed in Chapter 12.
Terrestrial animals as well as insects are said to leave behind them different aches for people to contract
in the places they pass through and the things they touch. For example, holding a working tool left
outside overnight and sniffed by an ocelot or on which a butterfly has rested may result in arm pains;
urinating on a bullet ant (Paraponera clavata) nest or on the footprints of peccaries, tapirs, capybaras,
271

and other large mammals may cause bladder problems, and stepping on a path previously stomped by
them or on their excrements may cause different types of knee and leg pains called fɨsé.
The epidemiological, physical, mental, and social harms that may follow the consumption of animals or
experiencing other aggressions by nonhumans and their owner-persons are collectively referred to as
enfermedades (“illnesses” or “diseases”) in Spanish, and in Andoque are expressed through the verbs yií
and ti. Illnesses and misfortunes have owner-persons, who are the entities who created them and who
would direct them at those who iterate the name of the mishap or of its owner person without providing
adequate offerings. Both verbs yií and ti convey the notion of losing human status. Yií, “to kill
consciousness,” describes one’s state of mind during the process of infirmity, drawing on the lack of
consciousness in death as well as in the temporary death of fainting, and the deranged consciousness
during illness, dizziness, and drunkenness—all are states conveyed by yi. In contrast with hɵ́ɵ, which
denotes the perceptible death or physical disappearance of a given being, yi can refer to states where the
person is still outwardly human, and their body still exists, but their consciousness has been hijacked
(Jon Landaburu, Pers. comm. November 2022). The teleological dimension is more present in the verb
ti—“to make/form/transform”—which denotes the affected person’s ultimate transformation into a
nonhuman being upon death, but also the deranged mental, physical, or social state during the negative
event that signals that the transformation to nonhumanity has already taken place. Several interlocutors
alluded to this deranged state during fieldwork after they recuperated from different afflictions, from
headaches to malaria, in remarkably similar statements, commenting to me: “yesterday I felt bad, I
wasn’t like a human being, I was—how can I say it?” (ayer me sentí mal, no estaba como gente,
estaba—¿cómo será?). In contrast with bu’, which expresses overt violence, both yií and ti are also used
to refer to sorcery attacks that seal the victim’s fate by transforming them into the prey of Sı̰ ́di and of
other powerful spirits even before their body is affected.
These verbs, yií and ti, and their combinations, i.e., tiyií, “to transform by killing consciousness”, reflect
the common Amazonian perception of illnesses and other misfortunes as the familiarization of human
victims by nonhuman agents, who turn the former into their kinspersons (Costa and Fausto 2019, 206).
This is also reflected in the interpretation of dreams where the dreamer receives food from others or has
sex with them, which is seen as foretelling a state of illness, because the people appearing in dreams are
actually nonhumans, and such actions create consubstantiality with them (see Appendix 5). The strength
of the person’s tutelary spirit, yono̰pǵi, determines whether they avoid such creation of

272

consubstantiality.93 In certain times and places, it is more likely to be affinized by the animals, their
owner-persons, or the sorcerers on whose initiative they attack. As in other Amazonian societies, where
a person is considered extremely likely to be familiarized by the animals during the period when their
body has still not achieved a full human form (i.e., during gestation and early childhood), Andoque
parents and newborn children are subject to many pre- and post-partum dietary and other restrictions
(Fausto 2007a, 505; Vilaça 2002). For example, parents are advised to avoid eating slimy or fat fish to
prevent their child from suffering from diarrhea or oral candidiasis—which is reported to have been fatal
before the arrival of Western medicine—and to avoid exerting physical force to prevent their child from
developing an umbilical hernia. In the case of male babies, these restrictions should be observed for
longer periods than when female babies are concerned because the animals are said to be angrier and
more violent after the birth of a male human child, who is expected to hunt them when growing up, than
a female one, whose garden cultivars may even nourish animals.
Beyond restrictions during apprenticeship, that will be examined below, other sensitive periods are not
related to the person’s life cycle. Elders can detect “times of word of transformation” (tisonńkn) or
“times that make the heart fear” (yítuíkőnńkn) by interpreting different natural phenomena and
especially by reflecting on them in their mambeaderos. During these periods people should beware of
what they eat and where they go to avoid illnesses and misfortunes. Most of these mishaps can be traced
to specific sites within the ancestral land where they originated and where people are more prone to
contract them, except for certain illnesses and epidemics recognized as originating from outside the land,
like malaria.
Like other People of the Center (García 2018, 102–4; Karadimas 2005, 219–21), the Andoque associate
disease and heat (pá̰ʉkói yíi), on the one hand, and healing and cooling down, on the other hand. Similar
to the Miraña (Karadimas 2005b, 226–29), their mythology also links heat and odor in an episode from
the myth of the pipe-blower Uiknñemn. In this episode, Uiknñemn escapes the flaming flatulences of
children, which cause various trees diseases (see M12 in Appendix 1, as well as Landaburu and Pineda
1984, 137–38). However, unlike these other peoples, the Andoque equally recognize the existence of
“cold diseases” (no̰sikói yíi). While hot diseases are transmitted by forest animals and are contracted in
93
The negative value attributed to engaging in sexual relations in dreams is in stark contrast with the positive value of such
behavior that can be inferred from Reichel-Dolmatoff’s analysis of the erotic nature between hunters and animals among the
Desana. According to his interlocutors, such dreams enhance the reproduction of the animal’s species, and the positive value
attributed to them is in line with the logic of reciprocal exchange guiding Tukanoan perception of nonhuman beings (ReichelDolmatoff 1971, 219).

273

sites found in the hinterland, away from the Caquetá River, inter alia by hunters touching the warm
bodies of terrestrial game and passing the heat on to their family members, cold diseases reportedly
affect primarily women and are associated with the anaconda and dolphin, as well as with the aquatic
world of the Caquetá River. Given the altitude differences between the hinterland and the river, these
explanations provided by my interlocutors are in line with Pineda Camacho’s understanding of hot and
cold diseases as associated with the river source and the sun, on the one hand, and with the river mouth,
on the other, respectively (Pineda Camacho 1985, 92). I assume that the recognition of cold disease
alongside hot ones derives from the greater importance that the Andoque accord in their mythology and
epidemiology to the fluvial exchange with non-Indigenous people, who they fear may take their women
(cf. M4, M5, M23, and M22).
Lakes, hills, and waterfalls are notorious places where diseases are contracted and transformations to
nonhumanity occur, because what normally appears to people as such natural landmarks are actually
malocas owned by powerful site-persons. These entities preside over groups of nonhuman beings living
there and administer the exercise of different illnesses and misfortunes that originate in these sites and
affect human beings. Human souls devoured by these nonhuman beings through such mishaps join these
invisible malocas. For this reason, revenge by owner-persons undertaken in different predatory forms is
referred to as ḭpáha, based on páha, which conveys the notion of value, and the verbal prefix ı̰ ́ ’, which
points to the altered state of the subject (Landaburu 1979, 186).94 By devouring the soul of a human
being, the owner-person fills the void left in its house after this human or their relatives killed one of its
nonhuman beings, to whom that human is equivalent, thereby regaining that which it has lost. These
devoured people are called “disappeared” (hɵ́ɵ) due to the disintegration of their bodies, but they
continue to live in these houses in a healthy, youthful state, engaging in all the cultural practices that
living humans do, including horticulture and ceremonial dances. As we will see in the excursus section
below, these disappeared persons miss their living relatives, and should one show up in their house, they
would insistently offer them food, drinks, coca, tobacco, and sexual partners to capture them forever by
creating consubstantiality.95 As for the Krahó (Carneiro da Cunha 1978, 11), death becomes irreversible
for the Andoque once a person accepts food and sexual invitations from the dead and takes part in their
social life, and, as a result, is familiarized by them.

94
95

For the widespread association or overlap between revenge and payment in Amazonia, see Fausto 1999, 936.
For similar ideas among other Amazonian peoples, see Londoño Sulkin 2012, 46–47; Taylor 1993, 432–33.

274

Therefore, to avoid disease and ensuing death, a person must always reject commensality and kinship
with nonhumans. If a person is bitten by a snake, stung by an insect, or attacked by any other animal,
they should kill it; otherwise, people may scold them, asking: “Is he [the animal] your brother, that you
care for him?”. The attacking animal may interpret the failure to kill it as affection by the victim, which
can lead to future attempts to incorporate the human victim into that animal’s society through other
means. Conversely, the consumption of “consanguineous substances” associated with the patriline, and
primarily tobacco and coca, which are either mainly or exclusively consumed by men, can protect
people who find themselves in such dangerous places or situations, shielding them from being tempted
into consuming the foodstuffs of the dead and animals. More generally, the strength of one’s tutelary
spirit, yono̰pǵi, determines one’s vulnerability to such hazards.
A clear indication that a transformation to animality is fully underway is a deranged mental state whose
expressions range from spatial disorientation to uncontrollable anger and other severely asocial
behavior, to senseless speech and actions, and plain madness. In such states, a person is yipá’imo̰no̰ɵ,
“of a new/unknown soul” or yiyoíkómo̰no̰ɵ, “of a soul that makes deviate,” with the interesting stress in
the latter term not only on the problematic state of the deranged person but also on its potential to
transmit this state to others (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm., November 2022). People in such states are
acting according to “new, unknown” principles that are alien to their own human origin, and, more
specifically, like animals. Rubio*, a young man in his thirties, started showing signs of mental illness
some eight years before my arrival, after a long period of drug and alcohol abuse while working in gold
mining. His mother told me that the first sign of illness had been his getting lost on his way back home
from the village while drunk and spending the night in the forest. That event was followed by entire
days that he would pass in the forest, supposedly to socialize with animals. His habit of uprooting his
father’s coca plants during violent outbursts was interpreted by several people as actions taken by the
diablo (invisible nonhuman entity) manipulating him to destroy the plants that can counter his
deterioration into animality. Yiñékɒ is also said to have entered a temporary state of madness for several
days, during which he dressed indiscreetly, thought he was a jaguar, and asked himself, while looking at
the people around him, “Whom around here should I eat?” Upon receiving blessed coca, tobacco, and
manicuera and resuscitating, he reportedly told the person who provided him with these substances (and
whom the narrator claimed to have been his father), “Brother-in-Law, you really love me; I was an
animal, and you made me human again.”

275

Several nonhuman beings are particularly capable of familiarizing people: the fi’du beings and the
“beautiful and dangerous beings,” a category including the tapir, deer, earthworm, and dolphin. The
term fi’du, which is often translated as diablo in Spanish, refers to the entire category of extraordinary
nonhuman beings inhabiting the forest, as well as a specific such being of a female sex seducing hunters
into sexual intercourse, known as madremonte in Spanish and rendered here in the form of a capitalized
proper name, as Fi’du. Similar to the Tatuyo’s wati (Bidou 1999, 74), these fi’du beings are absent from
the main mythic narratives but feature heavily in people’s accounts of their own forest excursions and
daily activities or those of others, as well as cautionary tales for children. Beyond the Fi’du being, on
which I will elaborate below, the category includes various beings whose definitions vary among
Andoque members and is open-ended, capable of admitting any unfamiliar, potentially dangerous being
that Andoque members encounter in their own land and on the other lands they visit or work, like La
Chorrera or Chiribiquete Park, or learn of from other Indigenous people or from Colombian settlers and
folklore. These include: “One Leg” (Kapa̰, a violent tapir leg detached from its body, in Spanish:
Patasola); Ká’hɵi (a shadow or reflection in the water); Hɒ̰’ɒ̰ and Ḭtamo̰no̰ (the latter translates as “soul
without owner;” both appear as a known person); other beings lacking names in Andoque and known in
Spanish as Duende (a spirit whose seduction of women, according to some, mirrors Fi’du’s seduction of
men) or Bambero (who scares people by tapping on trees’ buttress roots, or bambas),96 and other
ɵdefɵño̰e, “forest persons,” including hybrid animals and monsters.97 Although some of these beings
appear when people do not ask the site-persons’ permission to enter their sites and when they try to
protect animals by causing hunters to lose their way in the forest, and even though the site-persons can
also take the form of a shadow or an extraordinary or non-native animal (like a horse), they should not
be confused with this largely immobile category. Fi’du entities can move and interact with humans
beyond their specific sites of origin.
The “proper Fi’du” is exclusively female. Her name derives from the long “fiiiiii…ruuuuu” whistles she
emits in the forest, and her typical mode of action is to appear in front of lone hunters at dusk or night as
a beautiful, long-haired, often naked young woman and seduce them into having sex. This renders the
hunter ill, feverish, and eventually mad, leading to his death. The sexual activity does not have to be
physical, and a dream with a sexual content while camping in the woods counts as an encounter with

The Miraña grant this being a more central role and a name in the native language (Karadimas 2005b, 342).
For other such lists of powerful extraordinary nonhuman beings among neighboring peoples, that in some cases converge
with this incomplete Andoque “diabology,” see Reichel 1989, 80–82; Preuss 1994, 60–61.
96
97

276

Fi’du. She targets men who obsessively think and talk about sex and women, as well as men who appear
in the sexual fantasies of women far away. Therefore, young men are cautioned against engaging in
lewd speech and sexual imagination in the forest and having too many lovers waiting for them at home.
For instance, several people told me about a young Yucuna men who, while working with the Andoque
near the Mesai River during the post-genocide rubber-tapping period, ignored warnings by his elders
and incessantly boasted about his amorous exploits and sexual fantasies. One day at dusk, a beautiful
woman appeared in front of him and helped him fill his buckets with rubber. After several days of
receiving such help and flirting with her, he slept with her. His penis then swelled, he became feeble and
feverish. When he sought help from the Yucuna elders, they said they could not save him because Fi’du
had already taken his soul. Eventually, he died after a night during which Fi’du whistles echoed from all
around the rubber camp. The young man could not be saved because sexual relations with another being
is a strong way of both admitting and creating consubstantiality with that being. This consubstantiality
can also be created by receiving food and drink from Fi’du, who can lure hunters or any person lost in
the forest to her home, to join those who were previously devoured by her.
Fi’du also approaches young men during initiation into different cultural practices, such as healing,
sorcery, or ritual organization, and until the elder tutor informs them that the initiation is over. It is
important to highlight that apprenticeship to such practices is ideally undertaken before a man reaches
puberty or begins engaging in sexual activity, and people explain that when a man reaches old age, he
can reflect on the entirety of the teachings he acquired in his youth. However, during his married or
sexually active years, a man merely grazes the surface of knowledge, seeking ad hoc training for specific
needs like curing food for his wife or children and handling other simple matters. Apprenticeship to
ritual specializations comes with strict prohibitions against engaging in or even fantasizing about sexual
activity, as well restrictions on eating, the culinary equivalent of copulation: an apprentice is only
permitted to receive food from his mother or female blood relative and consume coca powder prepared
by his father or himself.
Certainly, just as the abovementioned idea that Fi’du attacks womanizers functions (or should function)
to deter men from such a behavior, the link between unfinished initiation and Fi’du attacks can be
viewed as a way for elders to impose discipline and authority on youth and make those interested in
apprenticeship commit to the arduous study process it implies. Initiation involves the narration of long,
intertwined stories of origin on the harms that sorcery causes or those that healing and dances help
overcome. Broaching these harms without sufficient elaboration that would prescribe the “antidotes” for
277

them can endanger the apprentice by unsettling his mind, or the apprentice can put them to use in a way
that endangers others. In the ontological register where these harms are associated with animals and
other nonhuman beings, this amounts to invoking them and arousing them in a way that fecundates
them, helps them reproduce and get a hold of the apprentice, instead of the other way around.
Despite the plausibility of this moralistic interpretation, it must be remembered that Fi’du stories—as
well as those of other malevolent animals, as we will see below—are ways to interpret actual death cases
rather than simple deviations from proper modes of behavior. Therefore, instead of encoding immorality
in the language of predation by nonhumans, as Londoño (2005; 2017) would have it, these stories reflect
the perception of immoral thoughts and behavior as one path through which such predation takes place.
The sexual seduction to be evaded is key in foregrounding the primacy of the Andoque’s attempt to
prevent symmetrical predation (in contrast with moral concerns). This parallels the hunting technique
where male hunters imitate the calls of females in heat to attract and shoot male animals or use mating
calls of males to lure females and rival males. As in the latter case, the predator (here, Fi’du) needs to
hold the prey in confusion and misrecognition of its true identity for a brief moment to kill it. Being
obsessed with women and purposeless sex means letting oneself be carried away by foreign affinal
principles instead of adhering to one’s true core, and can lead to such fateful distractions.
Apart from hunters, Fi’du also lures children. One story (M19, Raquel 6/7/19) recounts of an unlucky
hunter who, unable to find game for his family, shares a tuber of the elongated fi’du nḭtɒ́’dɒ, “Fi’du’s
yam” (Dioscoreas sp.) that he has found with his wife and four children. When the parents leave the
children at home by themselves the next day, an ugly woman whose hair is full of mud visits them and,
promising to cook the yam they love so much, orders the children to fetch water and wood to make fire.
When the water boils, she asks them to remove lice from her hair. While one child is cautious and
climbs the roof beams, the three others do as she asks, and as they get near her, she throws them into the
pot, cooks them, and eats them. The surviving child witnesses the entire scene from above and tracks
Fi’du as she flees into her burrow. The child then leads his parents to the burrow when they return,
where they manage to kill her by burning the red pɨdoɵtu chili (“bush dog [Speothos venaticus] chili”) in
the entrance to the burrow, forcing her out of there and away to the river source.98 While this story seems
to have the obvious function of warning children against trusting strangers and warning parents against
leaving their children without surveillance, it reflects the common Amazonian conception that children

98

A similar Nɨpóde version was recorded by Griffiths (1998, 319–21).

278

are especially vulnerable to predation by nonhumans (Vilaça 2002). Several people told me about an
adult woman who, when she was still a girl of about three or four years old, was left by herself for a few
hours at a remote garden cabin by her parents while they were working. As they did not find her there
upon their return, they searched her for hours until finally finding her by a bridge over a brook
(according to one interlocutor, diablos cannot cross bridges). The girl claimed that her father had taken
her there and then disappeared, so people inferred that a diablo appeared in front of her in the form of
her father to take her away and transform her into its kind. The elder Yinñéfɵkn healed her. The four
people telling me about this case disagreed whether this diablo was Fi’du or Hɒ̰’ɒ̰, one of them
reasoning that only Hɒ̰’ɒ̰ appears as a familiar person, while another claimed that they are in fact the
same entity and that people would say Hɒ̰’ɒ̰ to avoid iterating the name Fi’du, which is more dangerous.
The woman herself (with whom I admittedly refrained from speaking about this matter) is said to have
only learned about it when she was an adult. The same diablo returned to take a hold of her after she
gave birth to her firstborn son, driving her to kill him. She is said to have been permanently healed after
a ceremonial dance, but two people told me that all of this would not have happened had she been
baptized by a priest because this rite is said to protect children from diablos.
As in cases of sexual seduction, we also witness here the crucial role of confusion and misrecognition in
nonhumans’ imposition of their perspectives on humans (Viveiros de Castro 1998, 483) to familiarize
the latter. The diablos Hɒ̰’ɒ̰ or Ḭtamo̰no̰i (“soul without owner”) can assume the form of any familiar
person, and if the person in front of whom they appear responds to their call and follows them, or if they
betray accepting the veracity of this apparition by telling others that the familiar person appeared to
them in that place and time, their souls will be taken by these beings forever (ntamo̰no̰i yḛnni, “he [the
nonhuman being] goes with their soul”), and their physical death will soon follow. Since confusion and
misrecognition are the means through which these beings capture people, telling others that such
attempts were made and overcome, or even screaming when this happens for others to hear, ensures that
these diablos would not return to chase them. By contrast, a person who hides such encounters from
others communicates to the diablo that he or she likes it, and the latter will return once again. In AnneChristine Taylor’s analysis of similar encounters with extraordinary nonhuman beings among the
Achuar, these encounters are characterized by mutual gaze and by the lack of proper communication in
the form of linguistic exchange because these apparitions stupefy their human participants. They then
shift sensory registers when being communicated in verbal narratives told to other people who did not
see these nonhuman beings themselves (Taylor 1993a). The Andoque’s statements on such encounters
279

emphasize the causation link between the human-nonhuman and the inter-human communications:
communicating the human-nonhuman interaction with other humans is required to prevent future
communication with these nonhumans. The strength of a person’s spirit, yono̰pii, determines if that
person tells of the encounter and overcomes it or keeps it secret and is doomed forever.
Furthermore, we may view the diablos as powerful and dangerous precisely insofar as they have not
been symbolized and communicated to others and to oneself, as parts of the Real register of reality—in
Lacanian terms—that have not been symbolized and remain as a surplus of alterity, deriving their
potency from their existence within the realm of the unconscious. In Lacan’s words, “The real supports
the phantasy, the phantasy protects the real” (1981, 41). This absence of or even resistance to
symbolization is evident in the frequent disagreement among Andoque interlocutors, as well as
inconsistency in statements by the same interlocutors, with respect to the names of each fi’du entity or
the sensory impressions through which it manifests itself in front of people. In Patrice Bidou’s
understanding of the Tatuyo’s attitude toward the wati, the latter’s frightening existence and
indeterminate nature goad people to fix names upon them, symbolize reality and organize it through
myth in order to gain greater control over them and over reality at large (1998). In this regard, the fi’du
entities are the ultimate others and the ultimate affines who have not yet been familiarized—in the
double sense of the word, both in its use in Amazonian ethnography, and in common use, referring to
making something known and acquainted—by the traditions of the consanguine group; it is thus no
wonder that their preferred mode of operation is through sexual seduction.
The “beautiful and dangerous beings”—tapir, deer, earthworm, and dolphin99—follow similar principles,
and are collectively known as pa’sisíɵ́hɵ (“green/blue100 people”), sɵ’oi síɵ́hɵ (“pretty people”), and
bɨ’ɵ́kn síɵ́hɵ (“people of pleasure”). However, the first term specifically applies to the tapir, and the last
two terms apply in mythology to the dolphin.101 This generalization from the names of specific being to
the entire category is related to these beings’ ability to transform into each other, as each can shed its
own form and take that the others as well as other diablos. Nevertheless, each of these beings has a
distinct origin story, and the principles embedded within them can be also identified in people’s

some interlocutors also include in this list the giant armadillo [Priodontes giganteus], but others say that the latter is only
sent by people and cannot act on its own initiative. See also Pineda Camacho 1985, 92.
100
Andoque speakers often conflate the two colors green and blue under the term pa’si or pa̰ ̰así.
101
See M22 and M23 in Appendix 1. In M17, Pretty’s provenance from the river and “below,” akin to dolphins, is implicit in
the narrative’s juxtaposition between him and Sun, who lives “above.”
99

280

accounts of their own encounters with these beings and those of others. Sorcerers can use these origin
stories to set these beings on specific victims.
People explain that these beings are dangerous because they are beautiful and seductive, leading people
to irresponsibly desire them for superficial reasons—hɵ́ño, “to seem pretty”—rather than for the
responsible love that implies care and protection and denoted by the verb tuma. Except for the dolphin,
they mainly seduce women. The earthworm, ḭtá, often also described as one of Tatoañei’s sons seeking
to seduce and harm Shadow Egg’s daughters, is said to sexually attack woman by sucking blood from
their feet and climbing into their hammocks at night. Although I was not told any specific myth about its
origin, the earthworm seems to represent a dimension of the other masculine beings attacking women:
the overabundant sexual force of the earth (cf. Karadimas 2005, 108–09, 282–83). As in the Miraña’s
link between sperm, placenta, and the earthworm’s slime (ibid, 108–09), impregnation is a key step in
the earthworm’s attack. In a story told to me by two different elders about two distinct women from the
previous generation, a victim died during pregnancy after mistaking an earthworm climbing into her
hammock at night for her husband. After death, her swollen belly immediately flattened because it did
not contain a fetus but was full of the earthworm’s slime.
In this context, the Amazonian brown brocket deer (Mazama nemorivaga; pe’toɵ) is only depicted as
male. He is considered one of Tatoañei’s jaguar sons, which signals his sexually predatory nature. He
captures the attention of women in their gardens by crunching dry branches as he walks, and if a woman
mistakes it for the sound of human footsteps, she may look up and find a beautiful young man standing
before her. Sexual relations with him are said to make her fall ill and die. Alternatively, if a woman sees
a deer in her garden, she may dream of an attractive man and become ill in real life if she surrenders to
him in the dream. In a story told by Raquel (M20) and detailed in Appendix 1, Shadow Egg’s daughter,
Hummingbird (Pá̰di), who repeatedly ignores her father’s instructions for tidy manioc work, is seduced
while working in the garden by Yellow Achiote Deer (Doékositoɵ),102 who invites her and her younger
sister to collect larvae from a mauritia palm. After they join him, he cuts down one tree to serve them
larvae and urges the younger sister to climb another tree for mauritia fruits. When she does, he seizes her
older sister and takes her to his underground home, while the palm on which the other sister sits rises to
the sky. At his home, he leaves the girl sealed in a “pot of fire,” also called “pot of transformation,”
while he goes to gather firewood. His mother finds the girl and advises her to escape from her son, who

102

Doékositoɵ is also one of the terms for the Creator, see Chapter 2.

281

is Fidu’s son. When Yellow Achiote Deer discovers that his prey has escaped, he pursues her. However,
she finds refuge in Acouchi’s hole in a tree trunk, under Anaconda’s “protected chest,” and under
Kingfisher’s “protected wing” while he dives in the water. Ultimately, the older sister makes it back to
her father, and her sick younger sister, atop the tree, is healed and brought down by the smoke of the
Bush Dog Chili blown on her by Red-Rumped Cacique, who is assisted by Weasel.
A slightly different version of this myth, with a reference to the seductive being as a jaguar, serves as the
basis for the Armadillo Dance to name and protect firstborn children of non-maloquero families. The
illnesses contracted by the two sisters are classified as doékositoɵ yatiyií—Yellow Achiote Deer’s
Transformation by Killing Consciousness—and, unless sexual contact has taken place, they can be cured
with incense and smoked chili that are blessed by evoking the episodes of the acouchi, kingfisher,
anaconda, cacique, and weasel. Healing with these odorous substances reflects the idea that the deer, as
well as the other malevolent animals and diablos, make people ill and transform them into animals
through their smell.103
While aggressions by deer in gardens are associated with women’s untidy horticultural practices, which
can be taken to represent sexual promiscuity, aggressions by tapirs (ḭtɵ) take place at home without any
apparent immoral behavior on the female victim’s part, who simply accepts the sexual proposition of a
person she believes to be her husband. Several people told me stories from long ago about women
whose husbands returned home in the evening after going hunting and slept with their wives, before
leaving again to try their luck in the hunt another time. When the husband came back immediately
afterwards and denied having been there earlier, the woman’s belly started to ache and she bled from the
vagina because the “husband” was, in fact, a tapir in disguise, who damaged her womb with his
monstruous penis, causing the woman to die by dawn. Andoque interlocutors trace such aggressions by
tapirs to the story M21, narrated by Fisi and detailed in Appendix 1. It tells of Dance Rod Painting
(Kɒ́dɨhḭ) who lived in Sɵ’dɨnsí (Lake of the unidentified Sɵ’dɨ bird, called Pavo Marino in local
Spanish), when it was not yet a saltlick. This man used to damage the pineapples and other plants
growing in his daughter-in-law’s garden, and even advised his son on how to catch the mysterious
intruder. However, he avoided the until his son added honey to the caguana beverage he prepared for
him. The next morning, checking the trap, the son found his father, who, upon donning his accessories,

103

For this reason, smoking cigarettes in the forest is said to keep Fi’du away.

282

transformed into a tapir. The son then killed him, leaving the game for his brothers-in-law from the river
source.104
The cultivars stomped by the father-in-law, particularly the pineapple emphasized by Fisi and another
narrator of a variant of this myth, are metonymic for the woman because she has planted and tends to
them.105 These vegetal elements represent the passive “fruit” aspect of the woman, as opposed to the
active “person” aspect, in which the father-in-law must perceive her to affect his harms. As we saw in
relation to curing game and will see in relation to sorcery attacks, predators need to relegate their victims
to an inferior ontological position to ensure the desired direction of predation. This means constituting
them as deer when the sorcerer is a jaguar, or as pineapples when the maligner is a tapir. While the
father-in-law’s transformation to nonhumanity in this myth emphasizes the moral injunction against men
sleeping with their daughters-in-law,106 the cautionary tales of tapir seduction express the predatory logic
that equates misrecognition with familiarization by animals. However, people view this myth as the
origin of harms that tapirs cause women, particularly those affecting their womb and their ability to
survive childbirth, and that are associated with women’s seduction by tapirs.
The last of the “beautiful and dangerous beings” is the dolphin (Inia geoffrensis), which, like other
Indigenous peoples and riverine communities in Amazonia, the Andoque associate with the Whites and
the dangerous seduction by the goods they trade and the lifestyle that can be obtained by assimilating
into their societies (e.g., Arregui 2019; Echeverri and Pereira 2005, 133; Karadimas 2005, 360–68;
Reichel 1989; Slater 1994). Dolphins, referred to as ama̰na in everyday discourse and bɨ’ɵ́kn síɵ́hɵ
(“people of pleasure”) in the mythical register, can attack both men and women by appearing as
attractive humans, having intercourse with them, and then leaving them hallucinating, feverish, and ill,
until they ultimately die. People also report seeing them at dusk or when drunk as a group of people
dressed in white and wearing accessories such as a hat, a belt, and a watch, attempting to take them to
the river with them. When they return to the site in daylight or after recuperating their senses they find
the dolphins’ accessories, but the hat is now a ray fish (to cover the dolphin’s blowhole), the belt is an
electric eel, and the watch is a crab.107 People should be cautious not to behave in any way reflecting
similarity to the dolphin’s behavior, such as splashing while bathing in the river (which the dolphin
This myth also appears in Jara 1995, 156–57; Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 108–12.
In a similar Miraña myth, a pineapple (which is also singled in the Andoque version) represents the sister of a married
man, whose incestuous relations with her drive his brothers-in-law to kill him (Karadimas 2005b, 350–51).
106
On the link between honey madness and sexual madness, see Lévi-Strauss 2009, 139.
107
For a typical list of correspondences between accessories and aquatic objects, see Pineda Camacho 1992, 85.
104
105

283

might take at a game), or sniffling when having a runny nose (which sounds like the dolphin’s
breathing). In such cases, the dolphin might perceive these actions as signs of affection and appear in the
person’s dreams as an attractive sexual partner, intercourse with whom would cause illness, madness,
and ultimately death. The seductive forces of the dolphin can be harnessed by using its blubber, eyes,
and teeth to concoct love perfumes (Pineda Camacho 1992, 86).
The Andoque associate the dolphin with the river mouth and consider it to have an anaconda origin (it is
also called ama̰na hɵpɵ, “dolphin-anaconda”), which means that it is an aquatic predator, whose
predation is expressed through seduction.108 Interestingly, the origin myth of the dolphin links it with
another seductive animal—the tapir. The story M22, summarized in Appendix 1 from the anthology by
Landaburu and Pineda, tells of Green Tapir (Pa’si Ḭtɵ), brother of the hero Tofidei (see M23, also in
Appendix 1), who discovered his wife, Lady Peccary (Ḭńkn), engaging in sexual relations with her
brother Pretty (Sɵ’oi)109 during the preparations for a dance. Green Tapir pierced both of them with his
spear and cast them into the river, where they transformed into illness and madness-inducing dolphins.
The figure of Green Tapir ties the origin of one beautiful and dangerous animal with that of another. In a
version of M21 told to Landaburu and Pineda, Green Tapir is a descendant of Dance Rod Tapir (1984,
128 n.21). According to Fisi, after transforming his wife and brother-in-law into dolphins, Green Tapir
went from house to house, knocking on doors with his bamboo cane to hurt the women living in them.
M22, whose longer version is the origin story of the River Turtle-Bamboo Dance (see Chapter 11),
represents the widespread Amazonian association between dolphins and dances. Throughout Amazonia,
dolphins are reputed to seduce people, especially women, at dances (Arregui 2019, 10; Maués 2006, 15–
16; Reichel 1989, 115). However, contrary to other dolphin beliefs, here the dolphin is not a stranger
who is unknown to the seduced woman, but rather her brother whom she knows too well. The dolphin’s
incestuous origin seems to represent the lack of reciprocity in affinal exchange by Whites, who tend to
take more women than they give—recall, for example, the asymmetrical exchange in M5—and the
violent attitude that such lack of reciprocity enables them.

Cf. the alliance between the dolphin and anaconda in the Achuar’s eyes (Descola 1986, 124–25).
Pretty is the protagonist of another myth (M17, see Appendix 1), where he marries Sun’s daughter and his way of resisting
his father-in-law’s attempts to prey on him is by refusing reproduction (only reluctantly does he give his father-in-law salt
[semen] for mixing with tobacco paste [the woman]) and becoming a parasite threatening to cause his wife’s death, instead of
preying on her and her family by creating his own powerful maloca. Amounting to a rejection of affinal alliance, this refusal
of predation should be thus considered incestuous.
108
109

284

The fact that “the beautiful and dangerous beings” are associated with undesirable behavior seems to
validate Londoño’s moral interpretation of the Féenemɨna’s perception of nonhuman beings as
embodying different vices, whose discourse people should evade if they are to adhere to the values
highly regarded in society (2005). We can, of course, see this logic at play in the notion that by
recounting their origin stories, people who do not necessarily mean harm invoke them, innocently
making them attack people and frequent the mambeadero where these stories have been told. This
translates to the prevalence of immoral thoughts and discourse in that mambeadero. It is said that people
should only think or speak about these beings and the vices with which they are associated if they know
how to reject them, for example, by evoking the figures who defeated them in mythology and how they
did it. However, we must keep in mind that, rather than general moral teachings, Andoque members are
primarily concerned with the reproduction and well-being of their clans and, secondarily, with those of
the entire Andoque community. Animal thoughts and discourse in the mambeadero are first and
foremost described as useless (no sirven) because they do not translate to actions enhancing the wellbeing and reproduction of the human group. In addition, while broaching the mythical figure and means
involved in defeating these dangerous beings evidently reflects and communicates to others knowledge
about the ways to deal with and counter the vices associated with them, people also say that upon talking
about such animals, one can immediately joke about the frivolity of some other person living far away,
thereby making the malevolent beings go after that person. In other words, not only does moral
discourse operate in these cases through a predatory logic, but moral discourse is also put at the service
of a predatory cosmology. We must remember that the stories about associating with such beings serve
to interpret and give meaning to cases of actual death and physical and mental ailments. The beauty of
these beings, as well as the beauty that can characterize Fi’du in her female manifestations, and the
sexual receptivity of their victims, are crucial for these aggressions to work, in a way that parallels the
animal’s receptivity to mate as a factor allowing the hunter to tempt it to draw near to him and thus
facilitating the hunt’s success. This requires a more dialectical formulation, where just like nonhuman
beings embody different vices, so does engaging in these vices may lead people to share a similar body
and consciousness with these beings, which is referred to as ntii, “[he/she] transformed into them,” or
ntimo̰no̰i, “[his/her] soul transformed into them [i.e., resembling their souls].”
As we have seen, similar to the Fi’du cases, the moral dimension of these cases concerns sexual
incontinence and the need to be careful where and with whom one expresses sexuality. Therefore, we
can analyze these cases through Elizabeth Reichel’s sociological interpretation of the Yucuna’s reports
285

on sexual encounters with tapirs and dolphins as reflecting reservations and ambivalence toward
matrimonial alliance and association with specific human groups, namely, the Tanimuca and Whites
(1989). However, while the Andoque clearly associate the dolphins with Whites, I could not find clues
linking the other beings discussed above with specific human groups convincingly, as Reichel does, as
she links the seduction of male humans by female tapirs to past matrimonial exchange with the
Tanimuca involving a period of uxorilocal bride service (ibid, 104–7). Instead, these beings seem to
represent in the Andoque case different negative forms of channeling sexual energy, as desiring
someone too much can render the desiring person vulnerable to different kinds of distraction from their
principles of origin by outside elements. Failure to recognize the nonhuman nature of these beings and
the consequent sexual seduction by them seem to represent and aggravate the seduced person’s
weakness of the soul (mo̰no̰i), which should remain strong if it is to recognize the things and beings in
its environment and to keep predation by other human and nonhuman beings and groups unidirectional.
Consciousness and self-restraint, particularly sexual one, thus emerge as critical for avoiding
disadvantageous exchanges with other centers and for gaining a more advantageous position to control
these exchanges. We can learn about the relation between these seduction cases and spiritual power (and
lack thereof) from their description as accumulative factors, alongside others, in determining people’s
fate. In people’s accounts of the young Agustín’s snake bite in the rubber tapping camp in the Mesai
River in 1960, they attributed the difficulty of elders to save his life to his previous seduction by
dolphins disguised as a woman that he desired, itself the result of applying a perfume previously sent to
him by his malicious absent father (see Chapter 4). The snake bite was thus incurable because the
victim’s soul had already been taken by the dolphins, who reportedly swam in the river by the camp
after he was bitten, waiting for him to join them.
Familiarizing and Mastering Nonhumans
Whereas nonhumans prey on humans and familiarize them through illnesses, accidents, conflicts, and
other misfortunes, healing procedures are viewed as counter-predatory acts. The prevention of such
aggressions by nonhumans and the enlistment of nonhumans for healing purposes, as well as for sorcery,
depend on the degree to which humans familiarize nonhumans. These practices thus represent critical
manifestations of power, understood as asymmetrical exchanges of agencies, vital principles, and
bodies, as well as avenues for magnifying and employing it. After discussing such familiarization by
humans, I will discuss the counter-predation involved in healing.

286

Offerings play a crucial role in the processes of familiarization, both to prevent aggression by
nonhumans and enlisting them for various purposes, and are important for this dissertation’s discussion
of ontological manipulation and hetero/homosubstitution. The Andoque terms ḭtasé/ɵtasé, or ɵpáha are
used for referring to offerings, a notion expressed in Spanish conversations through the term
pagamento.110 This term is widely used throughout Colombia and captures the idea of repayment and
equivalence conveyed by ɵpáha, which is also used in other contexts to designate exchange between
different people. However, Andoque interlocutors find the words ḭtasé and ɵtasé, which are the more
common terms to refer to offerings in the native language, and especially those made at ceremonial
dances, opaque. These terms point to wider notions of familiarization that go beyond mere repayment.
As shown in Part II, when prepared with specific origin myths and intentions in mind, coca, tobacco,
and manioc products serve to familiarize others, endowing them with subjectivities that are more
benevolent and less predatory toward the producer and their kin. This function of offerings is referred to
as “calming down” (sḭ́ ) the recipient. When used as offerings for powerful nonhuman entities, the
impregnation of these substances with such meanings and intentions is doubly important, alongside
stricter observance of preparation etiquette and production of smaller quantities than for daily
consumption. We have seen above several examples of such offerings that can be made before hunting
to ensure game and avoid harms by the site-persons or before clearing a forest plot for building a house
and gardening to ensure the family’s safety. As we will see in Chapter 11, they are also made at
ceremonial dances to prevent disease, accidents, and conflicts on the group level. Offerings can also be
made at different moments after hunting, and not necessarily after every single killing. Some people do
it periodically upon finishing the preparation of vegetal salt as a blanket defense against harms incurred
during the preceding weeks of hunting routine. These offerings reflect the substitutive sense conveyed
by ɵpáha, which is shared by neighboring peoples in Northwest Amazonia. The offerings to the ownerpersons are an alimentary counterpart to the game that the hunter hopes to obtain or has obtained (K.
Århem 1996, 192), and replace the owner-persons’ “personnel,” namely, the game animals as well as
trees and other resources killed or destroyed and put to human use in different ways (ETSA 1996, 229;
von Hildebrand 1983, 57).

The forms ɵtasé and ḭtasé differ in that the verbal prefix ɵ in ɵtasé means “to make,” thereby referring to the presentation
of the offering, while the verbal prefix ı̰ ́ ’ in ḭtasé denotes a change in the state of the recipient. I hereafter use ɵtasé to refer to
the action of presenting the offering, and ḭtasé to refer to the offered item.
110

287

As Clara van der Hammen shows for the Yucuna, where coca is symbolically construed as people, the
offerings do not substitute merely animals but also humans (1992, 317). Indeed, among the Desana, it
seems that the alternative for substituting animal souls for vegetal offerings is to replace them with
human souls (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971, 82). In the Andoque context, individuals oppose the practice
(that they attribute to others) of making recurrent offerings to the owner-persons of animals and fish
before hunting or fishing to secure large amounts of game, more than a family needs for subsistence.
Based on the equivalence between human and animal life, it is held that the owner-person would thus
become accustomed to the exchange, deny the hunter game if the latter fails to provide an offering, and
prey on the hunter or his family members. This demonstrates the inversibility of familiarization, where
the fed pet can master its owner if the latter fails to act as such. It also shows that the offerings replace
not only the animals that the hunter wishes to kill, but also his own health and life, and those of his kins,
that he wishes the owner-person to spare. Interlocutors also hinted to this logic in their frequent
assertions that to name powerful owner-persons, mention their feats or narrate their myths, one must
make them proper offerings. Otherwise, the owner-person may seek out the person mentioning them
and, enraged at being provided nothing, inflict harms on this person and their kins. In these cases, no
animal life is involved, and it is as if the offerings substitute for humans, and vice versa. Offerings thus
operate in a heterosubstitutive logic where animal and human life are interchangeable with vegetal
substances.
In his analysis of the Miraña’s coca mythology and culture, Karadimas specified that the exchange for
game is not the coca powder itself, but the words that coca, together with tobacco, produces in the
mambeador’s stomach and communicates through his mouth, in the opposite direction of meat produced
in the forest and attended to by the master of animals, which enters the person’s mouth and then stomach
(2005, 197–98). This verbal dimension of offerings allows for greater symbolic flexibility, such as the
one we have just seen, where offerings now replace an animal, now replace a human, but also for a
greater manipulation of the owner-persons. García, who analyzed a Murui-Muina formula for asking the
masters for game, similar to the Andoque formula to approach the site-person of Tar Waterfall, argues
that by referring to game animals as fruits, the human speaker identifies himself with the nonhuman
master for whom animals are fruits, seeking to downplay the hunt’s transgressive dimension, and to
define the relationship with the master in terms of commensality instead of predation (2018, 262–68).
Thus, beyond mere substitutes, offerings allow the giver to manipulate the recipient and the relationship
between the two in ways that would suit the former. While Northwest Amazonia seems to stand out
288

within the Amazonian landscape in the substitutive mode that offerings can take there, the manipulative
mode of offering—where it serves as a vehicle for persuasion or commensality with nonhumans—is
attested outside it as well (e.g., Chaumeil 2010; Gutierrez Choquevilca 2010).
M21 presented an example of such a manipulative offering, with the father-in-law falling into the trap
after consuming the honey caguana, casabe, mambe and tobacco paste. In a version of that myth told to
me by the elder José*, which explains the origin of One Leg (a diablo in the form of a violent tapir leg
detached from its body), the father-in-law manages to avoid falling in the trap the first night his son sets
it, because his tutelary spirit (ɨpǵánn) realizes the danger, makes him trip on a tree stump next to the trap
and look at the ground to see that the leaves covering it were hiding a hole. The next night, the son
leaves the ritual offerings for the mysterious person, and after consuming them, the father-in-law is not
warned by his tutelary spirit, does not trip on the stump, and falls into the trap. Offerings can thus help
the giver impose on the recipient a perception of reality that serves the former’s interests.
In the version of the same myth documented by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 108–13), we find further
details shedding light on offerings. The morning after preparing the trap, the son finds the hole empty
and the yarumo leaves covering the hole broken. His father asks his son with what leaves he has covered
the hole, telling him to try others, because “the yarumo is his friend” (i.e., a friend of the nocturnal
visitor). The son uses other leaves, placing a ripe pineapple on top of them, on which his father
comments after the desired result has not been obtained: “Son, you do not know. All of that are his
friends. The caguana made of mauritia fruits, umarí, patawa, peach palm, all of that he makes by
himself” (ibid 110–11, my translation). The father then instructs his son how to prepare the honey
caguana, a substance whose efficacy should be understood as deriving from its independence from the
nocturnal visitor, who does not make it as he does the other beverages. More precisely, the honey
caguana allows to familiarize the father-in-law because it is the combined product of the son’s wife, who
prepares manioc starch beverage embodying an affinal element alien to her father-in-law, and of the
cannibalistic bees, who, created from the burned skull of an ocelot-star person, follow a predatory jaguar
principle, and transform the starch beverage into honey (Jara 1996; Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 125).
As we have seen in Chapter 6, and like honey, the cultivars whose products are used as offerings—
tobacco, coca, and manioc—are also associated with “above”—in this case, with the river source. This
provenance grants these substances the ability to serve as predatory agents. Still, to guarantee the
direction of predation—that these agents help the offeror familiarize the recipient, and not vice versa—

289

the offeror must prepare these substances himself (or in collaboration with his wife and immediate
family members), ideally from his or his family’s gardens. This guarantees that the offeror suffuses
these substances with his own thinking and odor to counter or modify the recipient’s thinking and odor,
aligning them with his own.
My interlocutors explained that owner-persons would only consume the offerings made by individuals
whose odor they have come to know. In the case of coca and tobacco, they say that offerings prepared
for important occasions—to secure an owner-person’s help for a complicated and dangerous mission, or
for a dance—should be made from young plants, that have not been overly harvested before. Based on
people’s statements concerning the risks of coca sale (see Chapter 13), I take this recommendation to
imply that the plants from which offerings are made may become marked by the recipient’s subjectivity
and the thoughts and actions in which he or she engages after consumption, making it a better bet to use
young plants whose familiarization is easier than those of older plants that may have been affinized
through past offerings. Another measure to ensure offerings’ familiarizing capacity is to iterate the
verbal formulas accompanying them in the native language, the Andoque members’ seat (kupa).
However, this is a thorny issue because people under 50 years old do not speak and pronounce it
correctly, while for youth, even more passive mastery is restricted. There is no consensus whether
offerings made in Spanish are as effective as those made in Andoque, and at different times I received
contradicting answers to this question by the same people. The most frequent response, however, was
that although the Creator, who acts as an intermediary between people and nonhumans, understands all
languages and can be approached in Spanish, he prefers each person to approach him through the
language that he gave their people upon creation.
Offerings thus display multiple dimensions beyond the substitution of one thing for another, the aspect
that the term ɵpáha (literally, “make value”) specifically denotes. These dimensions include
manipulation, persuasion, and deception, which convey notions of familiarization more strongly. It
appears that the terms ḭtasé/ɵtasé, which are more commonly used to refer to offerings, especially those
made on ceremonial occasions, have a more encompassing meaning that covers these more thoughtshaping aspects. The notion of odor may be central to understanding these enigmatic concepts. While
Jon Landaburu does not necessarily associate the suffix -sé with odor or body, preferring to see it as a
marker of reification (pers. comm., November 2021), the olfactory references made by my interlocutors
regarding the ḭtasé offerings, along with the role of smell in bodily transformations, suggest a more

290

specific hypothesis. The term sé is found in the previously mentioned noun séa, meaning “musk”—
associated with the aggressive aspect of odor that influences surrounding beings—and also refers to
elements such as fabrics, clothes, masks, or outward appearances. These are bodily attributes that can
affect the predatory behavior of the one wearing them (see M16). As noted in Chapter 3, The verb ɵsé,
indicating the act of feeding—primarily children and pet animals—is about forming the recipient’s body
to promote consanguineous, non-predatory dispositions towards the feeder. Therefore, I propose that the
ḭtasé offering modality aims to mold the recipient’s scent, thereby transforming their body into one that
is less predatory toward the offeror and altering their agency to be more advantageous for them. The
ḭtasé offering operates in a gift logic, serving as an extension of its producer, from whom it is thus
inalienable. Through this gift, the offeror intervenes in the recipient’s subjectivity, hijacking the latter to
their own state of mind, group, or reality.
As Karadimas (2007, 106) argued in his advocacy for a greater inclusion of the gift perspective in
Amazonian ethnography, predation represents an ideology more than a practice, such that, in some
cases, gifts are proffered to justify predation, or are otherwise informed by its logic. For the Andoque,
offerings should be viewed as gifts that function within a framework of predatory relationships.
Specifically, in venatic contexts, these gifts are intended to forestall retaliatory predation (ḭpáha,
literally, “obtain value”) by owner-persons following a human’s initial predatory act and to recast the
interaction as a trade. Based on the different levels of agency, subjugation, and alienation that we have
discerned between pets, orphans, and cultivars, we may say that the ḭtasé modality establishes and
sustains a master-pet relationship between the feeder and the recipient, who becomes, to some extent, an
agentive ḭéna̰ and an extension of the offeror, while the ɵpáha modality represents an exchange of far
less agentive and more alienable orphans/cultivars between two human and nonhuman captains.
Nevertheless, the gift, thought-shaping dimension of the offering (ḭtasé) is essential for the substitutive
aspect (ɵpáha) and logically precedes it, as it can lead owner-persons to accept vegetal offerings as
equivalents of animals or human lives. This is similarly observed in Fisi’s narration of M5, where the
offering in its ɵtasé form precedes its ɵpáha form: “Egret of the Center has made the offering
(ɵyaɵtaséai) and paid him (ɵyapáhai).” The gift characteristics of the offered vegetal substance also
underscore the power asymmetries sought, as gifting allows the offeror to gain advantage and dominate
the recipient through the given item (Gregory 2015, 13–14; Mauss 2002). Fisi’s narration of M5 also
hints at this dimension. When in their ɵpáha form, offerings may be demanded from the eventual

291

recipient, similar to how Egret of the River Mouth demands them over and over from Egret of the
Center. By contrast, the recipient appears to ignore the offerings in their ɵtasé form, which are described
only from Egret of the Center’s point of view. While one might want to be a trade partner exchanging
alienable or benign items, they would not want to be on the receiving end of an item that acts as a
potentially harmful extension of its giver.
Offerings are particular cases of feeding. Similar to other cases where familiarization is achieved by
feeding (Fausto and Costa 2013, 158–59), the offering displaces the recipient’s previous relations to the
substituted element, so that the recipient would no longer perceive it as kin. This is illustrated by Lady
Tar Flower, who, after accepting the hunter’s offerings, presents him with her “fruits,” which are the
animals of her site. Lady Tar Flower’s characterization of the animals as fruits rather than people
suggests she no longer regards them through the prism of consanguinity and commensality, but rather as
non-agentive things she can consume and offer without compunction. By inducing owner-persons to
alienate the animal they own, the hunter aims to avoid retaliation that follows the homosubstitutive
logic, in which his life, or that of his kin, would be forfeited in recompense for the animal life taken.
Therefore, calming the owner-person down (sḭ́ ) signifies a shift from homosubstitution to
heterosubstitution, or from a relationship of predation, in which the owner-person may seek revenge, to
one of trade, in which it would not. The trade performed may be seen as homosubstitutive from the
nonhuman’s point of view, who receives a cultivar (offering) in exchange for a cultivar (animal). The
non-reciprocation of life that Andoque members seek to impose on nonhuman beings after their own
initial predatory act reflects a clear attempt to prevent symmetrical exchange of bodies, persons, and
vital principles by an ontological manipulation of value. This may be summarized by the following
table:

Alienability from donor
Goal
Idiom of subjugation
Relationship between parties
Non-reciprocity

Ḭtasé/ɵtasé
Inalienable
Taming, manipulation; to align the
recipient’s agency to the donor’s
To constitute the recipient (to some
extent) as pet (ḭéna̰)
Asymmetrical

Opáha
Alienable
Payment; to transact between two
agents/captains
To exchange orphans/cultivars

Of agency
Table 2. The two Andoque modalities of offerings

292

Symmetrical
Of transacted items
(heterosubstitution)

In Chapter 1, I discussed the hierarchical distinction between captains and orphans underlying the
heterosubstitutive exchange of the captaincy system. Similarly, the ɵpáha (hetero)substitutive offering
mode implies hierarchy. The primary intention of saving human lives which lies behind the performance
of this kind of offering, draws it closer to the logic of sacrifice, a practice which is largely deemed
absent from Amazonian animism but characteristic of Southeast Asian animism (K. Århem 2015b;
Sprenger 2015). The sacrificial logic involves providing nonhuman elements to spirits or deities to spare
human lives, thus assuming a hierarchy between human beings and the nonhuman elements used and
manipulated to save the former. This hierarchy is discussed by Sprenger (2015), whose focus on
Southeast Asian sacrifices of domestic animals leads him to emphasize the human-animal hierarchy it
implies and compare the centrality of animal husbandry in that region with the centrality of hunting for
Amazonian animists. According to Sprenger, in Southeast Asia, agriculture and animal husbandry
encompass hunting, while in Amazonia, hunting encompasses agriculture, as he demonstrates by citing
Descola’s discussion of the Achuar’s perception of the predatory dispositions of manioc plants (2005,
584). This Amazonian reference also compares well with the Andoque data. Among the Andoque, as
previously seen, cultivars epitomize docility and submission, comparable to orphans. As inferior to the
person cultivating them, vegetal materials can be used as substitutes for that person in negotiations with
nonhuman entities seeking their harm, much like domestic animals can be sacrificed to save the life of
the human beings rearing them in the Southeast Asian context. In a fractal manner, anyone can act as a
captain, possessing orphans in the form of cultivars, which they can then trade with nonhuman captains
for their orphans or cultivars, namely animals. This is another context emphasizing the hierarchical
nature of the Andoque’s version of animism.111 However, this tendency to create hierarchies is not
exclusive to the Andoque—as observed, heterosubstitutive offerings are also common among other
Northwest Amazonian groups, which exhibit hierarchical structures in inter-human interactions. The key
distinction lies in whether hierarchy is paired with reciprocity. In Tukanoan practice, vegetal substitutes
for human or nonhuman souls aid nonhuman reproduction (K. Århem 1996, 192–93; Cayón 2011, 144–
45). In contrast, the Andoque do not acknowledge such reproductive aid; their offerings are more aptly
characterized as non-reciprocal.

111

Interestingly, the lower hierarchical position of plants, which makes them an appropriate “payment” (ɵpáha), derives from
their status as prey. In other words, the substitutive offering is underpinned by the relational scheme of predation, similar to
how the hierarchic notions of the heterosubstitutive-captaincy fluvial system are underpinned by notions of predation
manifested in the homosubstitutive river system.

293

While the appropriative dimension of familiarization in the Amazonian context generally implies a
predatory aspect, a specific type of offering that can be made during the River Turtle-Carrier Dance is
particularly predatory. During this dance, the organizer seeks protection from nonhuman beings and
their aggressive opposition to being used and consumed by humans by invoking Tofidei. This figure is
this dance’s owner-person who defeated malevolent animals and created the forest by transforming
anacondas into trees, and the game brought to the dance by the guests is offered to four of his pets,
namely, the main posts of the maloca, which are voracious anacondas in a tree form. Tofidei (“Pounding
Mauritia Juice”), who is said to live in (and is the site-person of) Parrot Savanna (Kɒ́’i Popái), which is
also called Pet Savanna (Ḭéna̰ Popái), is considered by the Andoque to be their god of war but can be
more precisely defined as the owner-person of mastery. His myth (M23), as narrated to me by Nestor
and Fisi and detailed in Appendix 1, is a crucial tenet of the River Turtle-Carrier Dance and is essential
for examining Andoque notions of familiarization not only as preventing harms by nonhumans but also
as a way of achieving mastery over them to attain different goals. The myth recounts how Tofidei
discovers his wife’s sexual affair with two dolphin-anacondas from the river mouth by feeding and
gaining the assistance of his wife’s pet (éna̰) parrot (kɒ́’i), which she has neglected. After killing the
lovers, he transforms his wife into the cacambra bird (kaó; Daptridus ater), instructing her to watch over
the merchandise (dohai) route from the river mouth for any enemies (yó’o). News of the dolphinanacondas’ death reaches those living downriver, who prepare for war. Anacondas, stingrays, caimans,
and other aggressive fish advance in big boats by water, while the trees, still anaconda people, come by
land, and cranes by air. Tofidei’s outnumbered people are afraid, prompting Tofidei to mock them,
comparing them to women “with manioc between [their] legs.” He then prepares a spear (fɨ’ɵfá), coats it
with black poison for hunting and kodi red paint, and raises it in the maloca’s patio in the face of his
enemies. They immediately transform into trees and stones—as do some of his men who witness his
feat—while the boats become islands along the Caquetá River.
This myth explains the origin of the “cold diseases” associated with anacondas and dolphins, to which
women are more susceptible than men. In Chapters 11 and 12, this myth will help us understand the
Andoque’s perception of Whites and related ritual transformations. Other narrators, including Fisi on
other occasions, made it explicit that the spear is, in fact, Tofidei’s penis (see also Landaburu and Pineda
1984, 102). In Raquel’s version, when Tofidei erected his painted penis, his sister helped by painting her
vagina in red with achiote and opening her legs in the direction of river mouth. On another occasion
when Fisi recounted this myth, he explained that this sister, called Lady Achiote (A’kosikn), defused the
294

enemies’ anger by laughing in their direction with achiote in the inner part of her cheeks. In José’s*
version, this woman is Tofidei’s other wife, and in Yiñékɒ’s version recorded by Landaburu and Pineda
(1984, 103), Tofidei marries his sister after vanquishing the enemy.
While people generally refer to this myth as the origin story of all forest trees, at other times Fisi would
say that it is only the origin of disfigured trees (those with bent trunks, cavities, or burls), while
Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 101) record several tree species mentioned by Fisi. By turning his enemies
into trees and stones, Tofidei curtailed their dangerous agency and rendered them beneficial for humans,
in the form of wood for construction, canoe making, plant remedies, etc.112 Because of this
transformation, the River Turtle-Carrier Band, one of the two dances of the red ritual specialization, is
called Transformation Dance (Ti Nni), in which the participants re-enact the war and Tofidei’s feat. The
phallic dimension of the transformation signals an interconnection between patrilineal identity and the
reduction of other beings’ agency. Here the identity of the individuals who were traded in the past,
besides war captives, also comes to mind, as these were matrilateral or otherwise non-patrilateral kin
defined as orphans, perceived to possess less agency, and effectively treated as objects. Additionally,
Tofidei’s incestuous marriage at the end of several versions portrays endogamy as a fantasized solution
to the dangers that affinal relatives pose to the maloquero’s rule. We have already observed in several
myths (e.g., M1, M3, M13) that the agency targeted for degradation belongs to affinal relatives: persons
safeguarded by the wife or her father. The husband seeks to diminish their personhood to utilize them as
resources for creating items such as the maloca, coca powder, or tobacco paste, which contribute to the
perpetuation of his patriline. A similar conception exists among neighboring peoples (García 2018, 418;
Karadimas 2005b, 130). This theme will be further explored in Chapter 11.
According to Tañe, Tofidei’s personnel turned themselves into mauritia fruits, so that he could crush and
mix them with manioc starch to create the bɨdɨ beverage, whose orange color is classified as red, peɒi,
the color of war, thereby gaining further strength from his men to fight his enemies. The offerings to
Tofidei in this dance include this beverage so that people can likewise overcome the beings surrounding
them, and turn them from enemies to pets (ɵéna̰, “to tame, create a pet”), whose actions can be aligned
with their own.

Compare to a similar yet more restricted transformation of the dance guests in M22, which is not considered the origin of
trees in general.
112

295

This shifts our discussion from defense against the aggressions by nonhumans and their pacification to
the greater degree of familiarization manifested in harnessing their agencies for human benefit. The pet
that helps Tofidei trick his wife’s lovers and kill them is the parrot, who gives its name to the site where
the hero lives (Parrot Savanna or Pet Savanna), and who is won over to Tofidei’s side when the latter
feeds him, which is what his original owner (namely, the wife) has failed to do. The same parrot still
informs maloqueros of different things before the dance they are organizing, such as bad weather,
problems among the workers, or what animals the guests would bring.
Unlike the situation reported for other Amazonian societies, Andoque members do not possess many pet
animals, and these are for the most part dogs—literally, “pet jaguars” (ḭéna̰ ḭño̰)—not wildlife, as their
Bora neighbors do (Lucas 2019, 283). During my stays and visits in Andoque settlements I saw only
single specimens of such wildlife: a monkey, a turtle, a parrot, and other birds; one man told me that he
had a pet paca when he was younger. Unlike the chickens grown by many families, these pets are not
eaten, and while some dogs are used for hunting, most of them are not trained for this task and are kept
as mere companions. Women and children are usually the ones who take animals as pets, feed and take
care of them, but this adoption is rather loose and lacks the commitment and intimacy reported in other
Amazonian cases (Descola 1992; Erikson 1987), as these pets can be neglected or forgotten after a few
days or weeks. For example, the members of one family adopted a suckling collared peccary when
chasing its herd, and initially fed him the oat shake prepared for their son, but then, when the family left
for a few days for the village, the piglet starved to death.
On the other hand, the mythical register makes many allusions to pets, and the shamanic discourse of
sorcery and healing is based on the help that pet spirits provide to practitioners. Andoque mythology
presents various examples of animals, such as Tofidei’s parrot, who assist a hero who initially bullies
them for no reason and then heals them. These animals, especially flying fauna like birds, bats, and
butterflies, then accompany (ɵ’ɵhɵ) the hero, providing him help and particularly privileged information
on past events or on things happening elsewhere, that helps him prevail.113 Like the hunt of the collared
peccary herd that ended with the (short-term) adoption of the piglet, and as in Erikson’s model where
taming is a compensatory mechanism for destroying the other through hunting (Erikson 1987), in these
myths the hero’s initial aggression is followed by his attempt to compensate the victim. However, and as

See, for example, Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 180, and the episode in the story of the orphan blow-piper, where a bat
tells the hero that his maternal uncles killed his father and where they hide, in M7 (Appendix 1).

113

296

Descola notes in his critique of Erikson’s model (1994a, 339), this is not compensation for
compensation sake, since its objective is to absorb into the aggressor’s self the alterity and agency of the
victims. The sounds emitted by these and other animals today provide people with essential information
about risks and opportunities and serve as important omens for things to come, whose deciphering
depends on the service of another pet—the person’s tutelary spirit, yono̰pǵi/ɨpǵánn, alluding to a sprout
(pǵ), or oéna̰, “my pet.” As we have seen in Chapter 7, the tutelary spirit is considered a domesticated
version of the auxiliary spirit tne’túi, imparted by Sı̰ ́di. While the latter appears in dreams as a jaguar,
the former appears in the form of a dog. The strength of this pet spirit helps the people it “accompanies”
in overcoming challenges and predation by human and nonhuman beings and accessing the mightier
power of Sı̰ ́di for sorcery, as we will see below. The pet differs from the orphan in that it represents a
higher degree of alterity from its master and, consequently, possesses greater agency. Based on the
examples I have collected, it appears that pets differ in species or bodily form from their owners. This
contrasts with orphans, who are also human, and cultivars, which are actively grown by people.
Therefore, while orphans can be seen as a specific pet category within the meta-affiliative master-pet
dynamic, transferring them to a third party presents fewer problems than revealing one’s connection
with the pets of the ḭéna̰ category, as will be discussed in Chapter 10.
Before the rubber genocide, the Andoque used to possess other entities that contained the agency of a
powerful Others, which was accessed by taming them and making them their possessor’s i’kɒi:
“valuables,” but could also mean “a toy.” Such entities included the yóʼőnn fulgurites (literally, “enemysegments”) and trophies from cannibal dances, such as skulls, bones used as flutes, and other body parts,
especially teeth. Jaguar fang necklaces, while scarce, are still possessed by some members, allowing
their owners to harness the jaguar’s predatory capacities for healing or sorcery. The idea behind this
practice is similar to the Miraña case, where the fangs contain the jaguar’s powerful spirit, and safe
access to it is possible by removing the fangs from the jaguar’s mouth, thus eliminating its physical
predatory potential and transiting the jaguar from the status of potential affine to that of real affine, i.e.,
consanguine (Karadimas 2005b, 86–88, 160–63). According to Karadimas, and as Lucas (2019, 345–53)
showed in her reconstruction of the Bora’s anthropophagous dances, this appropriation of the enemy’s
knowledge and power seems to have also been one of the ends for keeping, exhibiting, wearing or
otherwise using the body parts of consumed people, beside increasing the prestige of their possessors.
Such use followed the symbolic familiarization of the enemy in songs depicting him as a newborn baby
(ibid, 348).
297

The yó’őnn fulgurites are considered as especially potent and dangerous by Andoque elders and are
referred to as thunder-lightening stones because they contain the predatory power of this heavenly force,
metonymic of the river source and the might of the egret affine from upriver who imposes ancestry on
the center. However, this deity is converted into consanguinity by changing his name into Egret of the
Center. As Pineda convincingly argued, the yó’őnn embodies the thunder-lightning’s female daughter,
as the lightening participates in the formation (or “birth”) of fulgurites, and because, as Andoque elders
still say today, these stones allowed the manipulation of thunder-lightnings (Pineda Camacho 1979, 47).
Therefore, like an in-marrying woman, the yó’őnn must be familiarized to tame the destructive
capacities it has inherited from its progenitors and to allow its possessor to influence them. The
possession of such stones is depicted as incongruent with captaincy today because their owners would
no longer know how to control the rage they contain and would risk ending up devouring their kin. For
example, Fisi says that his grandfather Dóñékɒi, Yiñékɒ’s father, ceded his yó’őnn to another man when
he sought steering away from fighting, for which this stone served him well, to dance celebration,
because the stone was likely to provoke uncontrollable anger that would result destructive for his own
people in this new context. This echoes an anecdote told by Lucas, where a Bora captain and his wife
expressed fear of a jaguar fang necklace that they were entrusted with, worrying that they could not
control the unknown, predatory powers of the fangs (2019, 127–28).
These ideas concerning the dangers of yó’őnn fulgurites lead us to the asymmetrical and volatile
relationship with more abstract pets: the spirits on whom the shaman relies for different ends (Fausto
1999). As Fausto and Costa have shown, these pets are unique in being significantly mightier than the
shaman, who seeks aligning the agencies of these affinal entities to his own by familiarization. As such,
they must be properly fed and satisfied, lest their power overwhelm the shaman, who would
consequently lose control of their aggressiveness and become the spirits’ pet rather than their master
(ibid; Costa 2017, 41–48, 51). I use the term “shaman” to cover all ritual and esoteric specialization,
including the organization of ceremonial dances, sorcery, and healing. The Andoque categorize all these
specializations as tne’túo—the person who has gained access to the auxiliary spirit tne’túi, a process
taking place, as we have seen in Chapter 7, through the domestication of the tutelary spirit yono̰pǵi. In
other words, the taming and familiarization of spirits and nonhuman entities for shamanic ends depends
on a previous taming and familiarization—those of Sı̰ ́di, which are achieved by yoking the latter’s
predatory capacities to one’s patriclan origin (see Chapter 7).

298

The ambivalence as to the direction of domination in this master-pet relation should also be understood
as dialectical. The shaman does not familiarize the spirits “downward” by referring to them as his sons
or grandsons but “upward” by referring to them as his grandfathers (yo’tapɵ) and to himself as their son
(ɵ́tɵ). These appellations amount to strategically evoking meta-filiation, placing the shaman in the
position of the pet to elicit protection and aid from the spirits, which are a master’s typical actions
toward pets. While Bonilla (2016) used the term “parasitism” to describe a similar disposition employed
by the Paumari toward White bosses, the term “dialectics” is better suited to the Andoque shamanic
context. This is because, by portraying himself as the spirit’s pet at certain moments, the shaman seeks
to master it at others. This dialectical nature of familiarization can also be seen in the idea that the
consumption of non-Indigenous foodstuffs—those associated with Whites and traditionally grown or
produced outside the region, such as alcohol, onion, garlic, tomatoes, and canned fish—hinders one
from performing either cures or sorcery; some say that it even renders one’s body unamenable to both
kinds of procedure. While the consumption of certain psychotropic herbs, such as sita, mḭʼno̰éi, tɒ’di, or
taino̰ (yajé; Banisteriopsis caapi)—all of which Andoque elders claim to no longer possess or grow—
can facilitate communication with spirits for these ends, the adherence to a local diet is portrayed as the
very condition for such communication. It seems that spirits would not approve of the odor emitted from
a body containing the traces of such strongly flavored foreign foodstuffs (in contrast with milder ones,
such as bread) and would not recognize it as the body of a potential consanguine kin, from whom they
would normally accept offerings (or, in the case of a sorcery victim or healing patient, whom they would
accept as offering). In other words, to be able to familiarize spirits for shamanic ends, the shaman must
be viewed (or smelled) by them as “familiar,” that is, as kin.
The familiarization operating in assault sorcery emerges as particularly dialectical. Sorcery is expressed
through the verbs é’ekńi (“to bewitch”) or ti: “to do” something to someone, or “to transform” them as
something else. In Spanish, Andoque members make a distinction between brujería (“witchcraft”) and
maldades (“maleficia”) that does not exist in the native language. They say that while people can still
perform certain maleficia, nobody today practices “real” witchcraft. This is a distinction between “high
magic” and “low magic,” each implying different kind and level of familiarization of auxiliary spirits
and nonhuman beings.
The term maldades refers to the harm that can be inflicted on others by evoking mythic events where
such harm has occurred, or a similar state to which the sorcerer wishes to subject the victim. For

299

example, the sorcerer can “name” a pregnant woman’s body after unperforated objects, causing her to
encounter difficulties during childbirth. A classic example of maldad that people often mention is the
aging of a younger person, particularly someone of the opposite sex who has rejected the advances of
the maleficarum on the grounds that the latter is too old and unattractive. This is achieved by invoking a
story where Toucan does a similar harm to Lady Sloth (see M24, in Appendix 1), who has rejected him
for the same reason, and transforms her from a beautiful woman to the ugly animal she is today.
Although interlocutors do not explain it in this way, I suggest viewing the performance of such a
maleficium as the result of a process of familiarization consisting of two feeding actions. Firstly, the
sorcerer familiarizes the powerful entity, in this case Toucan, by feeding it with ritual offerings.
Secondly, the sorcerer hands the victim over to this entity, using such formula as “You who were
formed through this [story], go now and fight them for me” (haʉ bɵñe odi oinatiiɵ ɵñe oa ɵkntakn oma
nma nayóéfíi). Although the entity in question does not prey on the victim in the sense of consuming or
devouring them, once the harm possessed by this entity is inflicted on the victim, the latter becomes
incorporated into its personnel or the kin group of which the entity is captain. In Chapters 1 and 2, I
mentioned acting as the agent of exchange, rather than its patient, or object, as a precondition for
accessing and practicing power. It should be noted that the agents of exchange here do not include the
victim, who is passively transacted between the sorcerer and the spell’s owner-person. This exchange
relies on, and deepens, the asymmetrical exchanges between these two parties, as providing persons to
the owner-person is an additional step in acquiring mastery over the spell and its owner-person. This
logic also underlies the common idea that a person should not teach sorcery or healing spells to others,
let alone to non-kin, until after he or she has successfully applied them several times. Only then, as Tañe
explained to me, “you become the spell’s owner [dueño], and its power can no longer vanish.” It appears
that a person only achieves mastery over a spell once they have sufficiently fed the spell’s ownerperson, in the form of persons, whether victims or patients, that they have surrendered to it.
Nevertheless, the practitioner cannot abuse the spell or act whimsically towards its owner-person. A man
once told me that, as a child, he laughed when Yiñékɒ experienced an embarrassing incident, and as a
result, the latter cursed him that he would forever remain short by invoking a hero who inflicted a
similar harm on another in mythology. Several years later, when Yiñékɒ saw that boy singing in a
dance, he cordially told him: “One day you will be a man.” When I asked if he had also lifted the curse,
the man, who is indeed of short stature, replied negatively, saying that the spell’s owner-person would
have become angry with Yiñékɒ for practicing it and invoking him in vain.
300

The infliction of maldades can sometimes be facilitated by providing the victim with substances, such as
mambe, tobacco paste, water, etc., “charged” by the sorcerer with the specific curse or harmful mythic
episode. Conversely, sorcery categorized as brujería is considered more sophisticated also because it
does not depend on material substances and may not have any outward expression. This term refers to
the kinds of sorcery involving the ad hoc enlisting of spirits and nonhuman beings to perform different
hostilities toward others. For example, a sorcerer can enlist dolphins or deer to seduce the victim and
make them fall ill by providing ritual offerings to the owner-persons of these malevolent animals and
their myths of origin, or enlist other large animals to approach the victim’s settlement and leave aches
and diseases on the paths where people typically walk. One elder told me that in the 1970s he had
developed heel aches after walking along a path stamped with the footprints of collared peccaries that
had been sent by a Murui sorcerer. The harms caused by such sorcerers can also be perceived as their pet
ocelots; for example, another woman is said to have suffered knee problems caused by the same
sorcerer, and which that elder perceived in his dream as two ocelots that were hostile toward him as
well. However, a more powerful shaman can go beyond these pets and dream of a person, who would
then be the sorcerer who controls them; Yiñékɒ reportedly dreamt of a person wandering around his
people’s settlements at the same time as the ocelots and peccaries haunting them.
The ultimate expression of the enlistment of animals and spirits is the self-transformation of the sorcerer
into a powerful predator—a jaguar, harpy eagle, or anaconda—to devour the victim. Yiñékɒ is said to be
the last person to have affected such transformations, drinking to that end the liquid of bitter manioc
obtained during its filtering process and containing cyanide, to allow him to go under the radar of rival
shamans who reportedly relied on yajé and other more “conventional” psychotropic herbs. People say
that in this way he transformed into a jaguar after growing weary of the assaults of another Murui
sorcerer against his personnel. After drinking the manioc liquid, he remained seated in his mambeadero,
growling and roaring like a jaguar, mimicking a jaguar attack with his hands and body. According to one
interlocutor, at the climactic moment he left his maloca running to the forest, spotted a giant anteater,
chased it to its burrow, smoked it out, killed it when it attempted to flee, and ate its heart raw; according
to another interlocutor, he ordered his brother-in-law to go and shoot a nearby deer, cut out its heart and
tongue, and throw them away. In these stories, the rival died either on the spot or shortly after that
evening. While the interlocutors stress Yiñékɒ’s jaguar transformation, this action presumes the

301

simultaneous transformation of the rival into an animal that a jaguar can prey on, and that embodies the
rival’s reduction to passiveness and victimhood.114
The victims on whom these animals are set, or on whom the sorcerer preys when self-transforming into
a predator, should be seen as the food that the sorcerer provides to his pets as part of a familiarization
process. One such extremely powerful assault sorcery is ḭsiéso, which literally means “[transformation
into] a thing of their own [i.e., another person’s game],” and which involves the use of potent herbs to
establish communication with Sı̰ ́di, whom the sorcerer asks to devour the victim’s soul (mo̰no̰i), a few
days after which the latter perishes physically. These high ranks of sorcery are dangerous for the
practitioner, as his own life and that of his family members are at risk. Firstly, they are exposed to
counterattacks by sorcerers avenging the practitioner’s victims, and secondly, like any mastery
relationship, familiarizing Sı̰ ́di is a dialectical issue. Instead of the sorcerer mastering Sı̰ ́di, this powerful
deity can familiarize the latter and his family members if the sorcerer fails to provide him with his usual
“meals,” which tend to increase in quantity and frequency. “Like a dog that you no longer feed, it will
eventually eat you,” one elder explained to me. The outward expressions of Sı̰ ́di’s predation are
diseases, accidents, and other calamities befalling the sorcerer and his family members.
Further evidence of the dialectics of familiarization in sorcery is the fate of the practitioner’s soul, which
is said to go to Tatoañei after death. Tatoañei is a rock formation located at the headwaters of Macaw
River, and it is considered the origin site of sorcery and the herbs that facilitate it. Interlocutors say that
the sorcerer Fisidú’dɨ (“Stone Thunder”) acquired the capacity to self-transform into predators and
brought sorcery herbs to the Andoque from this site in the distant, pre-genocide past. The posthumous
departure of sorcerers’ souls to Tatoañei can be seen as their incorporation into the personnel of
Pópádɨkń, a rattlesnake god who is considered the site-person of Tatoañei and who is also called
Tatoañei in mythology. As phallic in body shape as any snake is, this bushmaster (Lachesis muta) is
extremely long (over two meters) and venomous, being the most lethal viper in their territory. Tatoañei,
the other personification of this rock formation, is a powerful symbol of male sexual aggressiveness.
According to Andoque mythology (e.g., M10; M20), and as befitting a being inhabiting a high place
upriver, Tatoañei’s sons prey on the daughters of Shadow Egg who live downriver from them by
These stories are reminiscent of Echeverri’s (2022, 148–61) description of Murui-Muina shamanic practice, in which the
shaman materializes diseases and moral dangers in game animals, and hunting them signifies victory over those ailments and
dangers. However, unlike the Murui-Muina materials, the Andoque stories do not carry the same moral connotations, as the
animals in their stories represent specific human enemies, rather than only disease or more abstract dangers to the social
order.

114

302

seducing and/or impregnating them. These sexual encounters result in illnesses (as in M20) or the birth
of mischievous beings, themselves unrestrainedly phallic (like Hummingbird Egg in M10; and see
Pineda 1979, 45–46 on the hummingbird’s phallic connotation). Sorcery, including the diseases and
fatalities to which it gives rise, is intimately linked with sexual conquest, similarly to other illnesses
caused when a person becomes consubstantial with animals through sexual contact. Andoque members
say that the Creator left Tatoañei and Shadow Egg in charge of illnesses and remedies, respectively.
Therefore, to bewitch and cause disease and death by sorcery, a shaman must communicate with
Tatoañei, just as he should communicate with Shadow Egg if he is to affect healing.
Another nonhuman being whom the sorcerer can enlist to attack others is the anaconda. Given its abode
in holes, it is believed that this powerful predator maintains an underground tunnel network called
“anaconda paths” (hɵpɵ ̰obɨ), through which a shaman can travel unnoticed in an anaconda form and
attack his rival by surprise. The enlistment of this and other animals for assaults is said to be possible
only within ancestral land, whereas certain maldades that draw on mythology can be performed even
outside of it. Another key characteristic of the anaconda, its mainly aquatic habitat, is evoked for healing
purposes. We shall now turn to examine this and additional forms in which nonhuman beings are
enlisted to aid humans and defend from both sorcery and such nonhuman aggressions, as discussed in
the preceding sections.
Healing: Countering Predation by Nonhumans
The final context of exercising power in relations with nonhumans to be considered in this chapter is
healing, which is aimed at countering predatory attempts by these entities to appropriate human bodies
and lives. However, this practice depends on the support of other nonhuman agents—the cures and their
owner-persons—implying that the healer engages in an asymmetrical exchange with these agents.
Some healing procedures, expressed through the verb ɵ’nó (“to cure”), are considered simpler and
involve only herbs or other remedies (ɵ’nó̰sé) but do not require spells. Others, which are often more
complex and are used to treat more severe diseases, may also include plants and other substances, but it
is the use of spells derived from mythology to achieve efficacy that distinguishes the practice as ǵ’a
(“cure by spells”).115 As with sorcery, there is no specific word for “healer” in the Andoque language,
and this specialization is also subsumed under tne’túɵ. However, in Spanish conversations, the
This distinction resonates with the Miraña’s perception of plants without masters, which can cure “by themselves,” and
plants with masters, with whom the healer must communicate in order to make the plant effective (Karadimas 2005b, 225).

115

303

Andoque, who seldom use the word chamán (“shaman”), refer to healers as curanderos, sometimes
designating those using herbal medicines to treat simpler cases as yerbaderos (“herbal healer”). People
generally refrain from referring to themselves as healers for several reasons, including the potential
dangers involved in healing, their general reluctance to declare ritual specializations, and the lower
esteem in which the healing specialization is held (topics that will be discussed in this and the following
chapters). However, they acknowledge that most fathers know the necessary spells to treat basic
pediatric conditions and cure food for their children, and many individuals may say that they know how
to treat the symptoms of several diseases or stabilize patients’ conditions. Nonetheless, they assert that
no Andoque member today possesses the knowledge and capacity that are only attributed to past healers,
who are compared to surgeons and could completely eradicate the disease by expelling the pathogenic
agent from the body. “There are no surgeons today,” Mario told me, “We’re all nurses.” The decline of
such “horizontal shamanism” where the healer interacts with animals to address a patient’s condition
after the disease has taken hold, as opposed to “vertical shamanism” that prevents diseases and
misfortunes on the collective level, is reported for other societies in Northwest Amazonia (S. HughJones 1994; Lucas 2019, 136–38). However, Andoque members attest that in past severe cases they
turned to healers from other ethnicities, such as Murui-Muina, Miraña, and especially Yucuna, Macuna,
and other groups of the Apaporis-Vaupés system, where such “surgeons” are said to still exist.
Healing among other People of the Center is described as a process of “cooling down” the disease’s heat
and “sweetening” the pathogenic agent and the patient’s body (Echeverri 2022; García 2018; Griffiths
1998; Karadimas 2005; Londoño Sulkin 2012; Lucas 2019). Karadimas and García describe similar
Miraña and Murui-Muina perceptions of medicinal plants as curing patients by cooling them down
through the water they contain or are soaked in, and also mention that these are owned by female spirit
masters (García 2018, 116–23; Karadimas 2005b, 229–31). In his analysis of Murui-Muina healing
procedures, García identifies a complementarity between cooling down and sweetening, where cooling
down involves a change in the condition in which a given entity is found, while sweetening involves a
change in the properties inherent to it (García 2018). In contrast with their neighbors, the concept of
cooling down does not figure as greatly in Andoque healing and general discourse as it does among
these other peoples, and they do not conceive of healing as sweetening. However, cooling down is
important for healing “hot diseases,” just as heating up is important for treating the “cold diseases” that
they stress more than their neighbors, and healing also requires a change in the patient’s properties, like
the one referred to by the Murui-Muina through the notion of sweetening.
304

Healing is associated with the river mouth and “below” as a counter-predation measure, given that
predation is linked to the river source and “above.” As previously mentioned, communicating with
Shadow Egg, the owner-person of remedies, is necessary for healing. Since Shadow Egg and his
daughters often defend against attacks by Tatoañei, it is important to understand sorcery strategies for
effective healing, and vice versa. In the myths featuring Shadow Egg and/or his daughters, different
elements of their environment, that, as such, should be regarded as their kin, are disguised and appear as
human beings to their upriver “predators”—those trying to extract them and use them for various
purposes. Accordingly, to protect the victim from illness predation, a healer must recover the active
“person” aspect of the victim, in contrast to the passive “fruit” aspect on which the predatory agent, or
the sorcerer manipulating it, tries to expand and exploit. In Goffman’s (1958) terms, we may say that
both parties try to define the situation in their best interest: the pathogenic agent tries to impose a
definition where it is a human being and the victim is a fruit, whereas the healer tries to impose on this
agent, and, equally important, on the victim him or herself, a definition where the former is an animal
and the latter is a person, who, as such, possesses an agentive principle to reject the pathogen and fight
back. In essence, sorcery and healing involve ontological manipulation, which depend on the graded
agency in the Andoque’s animism.
Because their affinization by the pathogenic agent is already underway, the patient is both part of the
problem and part of the solution. To diagnose the patient the healer must go beyond the information
provided by the former, who is asked about the places visited and dreams about sexual encounters. The
healer also smells the patient to determine what nonhuman scent has settled in their body. Since the
patient is part of the problem, the healer may blow chili smoke to make them cough and expel the
pathogenic agent from their body or use other techniques to startle and frighten the patient into expelling
the pathogen, for example by sprinkling cold water on their naked body. The healer also prescribes
certain dietary rules to the patient and their family based on the patient’s specific disease or condition. It
is relatively common for the healer to recommend avoiding the consumption of large mammals such as
tapirs and deer, which have an increased capacity to affinize people. The patient’s steering away from
nonhumanity may take different forms, and the dietary rules are adjusted accordingly. The healer may
prohibit foodstuffs that resemble the disturbed condition in shape or texture, such as advising someone
with a deep cut to avoid juicy fruits or the fat domesticated pig, since the wound may worsen to
resemble these substances, producing more pus instead of drying up. During the healing and recovery
process, the patient must also maintain a distance from people emitting strong, alluring body scents,
305

such as the odors of sweat, sexual activity, menstruation, or pregnancy, as well bitches in heat and male
dogs aroused by them. These odors have the potential to stimulate the nonhuman pathogenic agent,
thereby increasing its desire to couple with the patient, contrary to the desired outcome of the treatment,
which is diminishing it. Full compliance with the healer’s instructions is necessary for the treatment to
work, as it signals the patient’s “faith” in the healer. The Spanish expression tener fe, which translates
the elusive Andoque term hnnḛ́’ḭ́ (“say yes”), refers here to one’s allegiance to the person who seeks
preventing their slide into nonhumanity. On the other hand, a failure to comply points to the weakness of
the patient’s spirit (yono̰pɨi) and their intensified nonhuman state. Because the patient is considered part
of the problem, a healer is unable to cure himself except for mild conditions whose overcoming involves
only herbal plants and does not require invoking the owner-persons of the cures, and certainly not if the
ill-condition is caused by an extremely powerful entity, like a human sorcerer or a site-person.
Healing is perceived as a power struggle between the healer and the pathogen, and the latter can also
turn against the former. One elder, for example, said that after treating many patients, his arm started to
hurt, which he took as a sign that he should be more selective in the patients he admits, lest he be
exposed to too many malevolent nonhumans. The predatory capacities of the auxiliary spirit tne’túi is
crucial for defeating the pathogen. Another elder explained to me that the necessary approach for
healing is to “arrive [to the treatment] with anger (mntúi), not fear, because if you are afraid the disease
has already won over you. If I see an ill person, I tell myself, ‘Thanks to my spirit (tne’túi), nothing is
going to happen to me,’ and I start healing.” The strength and clarity of thought provided by a person’s
access to the auxiliary spirit are crucial elements for a healing procedure to work. In Andoque members’
accounts of pre-genocide cannibal dances, and as Pineda Camacho also reports for the Murui-Muina
(2005, 226), one of the functions of these dances was to strengthen the connection between the
participants consuming the victim, and especially the shamans officiating the dance, and Sı̰ ́di to gain
better access to tne’túi to heal severe illnesses, as well as improve sorcery abilities, which also depend
on one’s tne’túi.
Whereas for any person dreaming about a flashlight’s malfunction predicts a general weakness of
thought, for a healer it may predict a patient’s death caused by the healer’s insufficient access to tne’túi.
In cases where the pathogen is sent by a sorcerer, curing is also a struggle between the sorcerer and the
healer, with the sorcerer trying to bewitch those attempting to prevent him from consuming his victims.
This is said to have occurred in the 1960s, when a non-Andoque sorcerer bewitched Andoque members

306

and the elders who treated them, and, as previously noted, reportedly deterred Yiñékɒ from treating
Agustín, whose snake bite was indirectly caused by a Yucuna/Carijona man.
While Shadow Egg is generally considered the owner-person of the counter-predatory principle, the
anaconda is specifically associated with many healing procedures, particularly those used to treat “hot
diseases.” In M20, Shadow Egg’s daughter seeks refuge from Tatoañei’s son by moving closer and
closer to water. She first finds refuge in Acouchi’s hole in the base of a tree trunk, then she is hidden by
the anaconda, and finally, under the wing of the kingfisher, who dives into the water with her. In a
variant of the myth that serves as the origin for the Armadillo Dance for the protection of children and
parturient women and narrated by Fisi, Tatoañei’s son is identified as a jaguar, and the anaconda
impregnates the girl and gives fern (ti’ñḛdɨ, Pteridaceae sp.) to this fugitive, who, after being taken
underwater with the kingfisher, gives birth there. Associated with the river and the river source, the
anaconda instills in the girl a cool principle necessary to overcoming the heat implied in her previous
state, when she was sealed in the “transformation pot,” and to counterbalance the cooking process to
which she was about to be subjected. The anaconda’s association with the curative fern is typical for its
association with trees and plants in general, and medicinal plants in particular. A healer who relies
mostly on herbal medicines told me that all the trees and plants were once anacondas, before Tofidei
transformed them into vegetal beings, and that to use them to cure, a person must turn to them as “my
grandfather anaconda” (noyo’tapɵ hɵpɵ), asking them to cool down (ú’ɵ) the patient’s body.116 Owing to
its aquatic habitat and association with the river mouth, the anaconda can counter the hot diseases
associated with the sun and the hinterland (and, by extension, with the river source), by cooling them
down, just as the water inside trees protects them from drying up under the scorching equatorial sun.117
Unlike Shadow Egg and his personnel who are plants and game animals, the anaconda is predatory in its
own right, and is positioned opposite to the sun—like in M15, where it eats Sun’s daughter. In another
myth recorded by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 182–83), various psychoactive and medicinal plants
were created from the head of a presumptuous young anaconda who did not listen to his father’s
warnings and died while trying to devour a tapir that was too powerful for him to overcome.

The curative attributes of trees are also attested in M12 (in Appendix) where U’ḭknñemn defends from the beetle’s
flatulence by hiding in the trunk of a peach palm. For a similar myth and notion among the Miraña, see Karadimas 2005,
226–29.
117
In M17 (see in Appendix 1), the hero cannot resist Sun’s flames and ends us being burned, because he cannot produce salt,
which represents semen. In other words, his body does not contain vital liquids.
116

307

While the anaconda helps cure hot diseases, the red paints of kodi118 and achiote helps cure cold diseases
associated with the river and with Whites in men and women, respectively. To use these substances,
people rely on M23, where these plants help Tofidei and his sister—the owner-persons of this
treatment—to defend from their downriver enemies. Chili is used for various conditions, and its origin
from the sky above (see M10) explains why it can counter attacks by chthonic forces, such as Fi’du who
inhabits a burrow and treats human children like vegetal beings “from below” by cooking them as if
they were yam tubers (M19).
Healers turn to various other plants and animals to effect cures, with the general idea of making the
patient resemble them in certain respects. One elder told me about a certain owl that is evoked to protect
the fetus during pregnancy and avoid miscarriage, because its nest is remarkable in remaining firm
wherever it is built and never falls. Rubbing the bark of a forest tree pɨdadɨtakń on scars, which renews
its bark annually, helps skin regeneration and scar disappearance. Another elder reportedly cured his
son’s severe stuttering during infancy by putting a cicada known to sing continuously in his mouth.
However, this same treatment is now considered responsible for this son’s excessive chattering. This is
why healing involves not only making the patient resemble the plant or animal in question but also
controlling the extent of this resemblance, which can be seen as another instance of mastering the
direction of familiarization.
In addition to these nonhuman auxiliars, people stress that to succeed, the healer and patient must
confide in the Creator, whose intervention determines the treatment’s outcome. Similar statements are
also reported among the Miraña, who contrast themselves with the “People of Animals” of the VaupésApaporis who dedicate tobacco and coca to animals for healing. In contrast, they self-identify as “People
of God” who dedicate these substances to the Creator in such situations (Karadimas 2005b, 30). These
statements also resonate with Bora and Féénemɨna discourse, where healers no longer rely on animals to
aid them as in the past, but instead use tobacco, which is considered the ancestral principle of human
beings, and as such helps them prey on nonhumans (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 71; Lucas 2019, 135–40).
However, it is important to remember that in the Andoque case, evoking the Creator is a technique of
domination. Therefore, while healing is enabled by resorting to different nonhuman entities, from
Shadow Egg and the anaconda to various animals and the owner-persons of specific medicinal herbs,
evoking the Creator and providing this entity, as well as to the other nonhuman beings involved, with
118

My interlocutors referred to this plant as carayuru, hence it may be Fridericia chica.

308

the familiarizing substances of coca and tobacco, aim to control both the direction of familiarization for
preventing the patient’s affinization, and the extent of resemblance between the patient and nonhuman
auxiliars.
To conclude the topic of taming nonhumans and their enlistment for sorcery, healing, and other ends, it
is important to note their voluntary dimension and distinguish them from involuntary ones: the arrival of
animals to people’s mambeaderos to consume coca and other ritual substances. Contrary to the
intentional familiarization of nonhuman beings to render them as pets and align their agencies to those
of their human masters, the arrival of nonhumans to people’s mambeaderos and commensality of ritual
substances with them is the result of the mambeadores’ neglect. In a song from the Fruit Dance, the
singer-dancer scolds the host for allegedly taking care of and feeding a certain scorpion:
Why do you, over here,
Care for him?
Coca Scorpion (hí’píe tɒdɵ),
Tobacco Scorpion (tá’u tɒdɵ).
You care for him (tú).
You, me, it will sting [us both].

Animals arrive in the mambeadero when they are summoned there by the mambeadores who tell stories
related to them or express discourses over social behavior and institutions related to them, without
complementing them with the parts from the origin stories of these beings depicting their demise or
limits to their power. Nonhumans then interpret such discourse as an invitation to stay, and with time,
claim an increasingly central position there. In the case of the scorpion, this is manifested in bites, and in
the case of other nonhumans, in various physical, mental, and social disorders they inflict on the maloca
residents to affinized them. Animals arrive in the mambeadero not only when they are offered words,
but also when they are provided with the coca prepared and consumed there by humans. This is why
mambeadores tend to burn in the fire the husk of coca leaves that resists filtering or carefully rub the
accidentally spilled coca powder within the mambeadero area, so it does not spread outside it and attract
unwanted beings. Such purposeful ways of discarding of coca are the material counterpart of the
discursive ways of rejecting nonhuman beings by telling their complete origin stories, and their intention
is the same: to control the extent of human-nonhuman relations and the direction of familiarization
taking place between them.

309

As demonstrated in this chapter, the relationships between human and nonhuman centers are
characterized by a continuum of familiarization, wherein each party seeks to tilt the potentially
symmetrical predatory exchange in their favor. This tilt aims to create a beneficial asymmetry, allowing
one party to appropriate more bodies, vital principles, and agency from the other party than what it
surrenders. In the next chapter, we will explore how power dynamics among human centers are
influenced by and instrumentalize these asymmetries with nonhumans. However, interested readers are
first invited to embark on a short excursus into (and out of) the “House of the Missing,” a theme from
Andoque cosmology that offers a neat topographical model for the human-nonhuman dynamics
discussed in this chapter.

310

Excursus: In and Out of the House of the Missing
During my fieldwork, I was captivated by the stories that people told me about the “House of the
Missing” (nihɵ́ɵ síɵ́hɵ ḭpɨko) in a hushed voice, as if it were a very dangerous issue. These stories serve
here to reflect on the discussion of the previous chapter, as the place they depict and the dispositions that
people enact in relation to it offer a neat model for the familiarization dynamics discussed throughout
that chapter. I first heard about this house after the drowning of the non-Indigenous worker at the
Araracuara waterfall in August 2018, because people interpreted his disappearance as an incorporation
into the House of the Missing located underneath the waterfall. Several weeks later, Irene told me
another story on such a house located near “Transformation Lake” (Tinsí) (T1, Irene, 6/2/19):
One late afternoon, Genipa Flower’s (Fɵ́ta Taihá) wife asked him to hunt undulated tinamous (foí) for their
daughter. He took his rifle and went toward Transformation Lake, where there were many such birds. After he shot
one tinamou, several men appeared and invited him to their maloca. He refused: “My daughter is hungry, and I am
only going to fetch some tinamou for her and go my way.” Suddenly, two of these men grabbed him, took away his
rifle, and beat him with it until he collapsed and lost consciousness. When he woke up, he was lying in the front yard
of a big maloca, with his rifle beside him. Upon entering the maloca, he saw many pretty young women inside and
his father—who had died old and wrinkled many years before—sitting down and sieving coca, now young-looking.
“Son, have you arrived?” asked the father, and Genipa Flower did not reply. His father then offered him some
mambe. “I haven’t come here for mambe,” replied the son, who still had some mambe in his cheek. “Then eat,”
offered the father but Genipa Flower refused, stating that he had not come there to eat. The father then offered him
one of the women, but Genipa Flower said that he had not come in search of a woman either. Genipa Flower stayed
at that maloca for seven days, without accepting any food or drink and without sleeping, standing next to one of the
main poles. After a week, the maloca residents invited him to go pick coca leaves. He joined them with his rifle.
When in the garden, he excused himself to urinate, walked slowly away and picked a ripe red chili that he saw there,
and, at a sufficiently large distance, ran away to Transformation Lake, where he had been captured, and from there
found his way back home. “I was taken,” he told his relatives upon his return, “I don’t know what kind of people
they were, because my deceased father was among them.” He took the chili that he had picked there out of his
pocket, but that chili was now dry, as if it had been smoked. A few weeks later Genipa Flower’s wife refused giving
her mother-in-law chili sauce, so the latter went in the late afternoon to look for chili in the garden, which lay far
away from their maloca and close to Transformation Lake. As his mother did not return that evening, Genipa Flower
understood that she was taken away by those same people, because a woman does not have coca to help her think
and defend herself like that man did.

Irene learned this story from her grandmother, who had allegedly known Genipa Flower in her youth
and had seen the smoked chili. Later, I discovered that Transformation Lake is not an actual place with a
permanent physical location, and that any lake where humans are transformed into nonhumans is called

311

“Transformation Lake.” This story incorporates various key elements of the generalized predatory
dynamics between humans and nonhumans discussed throughout Chapter 9 in spatial terms of entering
and exiting a certain house. Particularly, it shows how nonhumans attempt to create consubstantiality
with humans in the form of commensality or sexual relations to familiarize them and incorporate them
into their society. The story also includes the perception of conjunction between the animals, their sitepersons, and the dead, as the latter lead a perpetual existence in the invisible malocas of the animals in a
state of consubstantiality with those who have brought about their physical disappearance through
illnesses, accidents, sorcery, and sexual encounters with diablos and malevolent animals. The double
sense of the English term “missing” translates the duality of the Andoque term hɵ́ɵ, as those living in
this house both lack the important feature that would render them living humans with human kin—
namely, a body—and long to reunite with their living relatives. For this reason, they try to seduce them
into joining them there, and people without relatives in such houses are said to be more easily released
by the residents. Women are an easier prey to such attempts of affinization because they do not consume
regularly or at all the “familiarizing substances” of coca or tobacco like Genipa Flower and other men.

Figures 17–18. Irene Andoke Andoke (left) and Raquel Andoke Andoke (Photos taken by the author).

When told by most people, such stories serve as a warning for others not to wander away from home in
the afternoon, let along actively seek out these houses, lest they fail to resist the temptation to reunite
with their dead relatives and become trapped there as well. Raquel told me a similar story when
312

explaining to me about the dangers of excessively mourning a beloved person, which hampers the
mourner’s ability to move on with their life. Raquel also attributed her story to Irene and Fisi’s
grandmother, who was allegedly the niece of the hero, here called Yitai. Her story (T2, Raquel, 8/7/19)
coincides with Irene’s story in that the hero’s mother is refused rotten manioc leaves for the preparation
of pí’na̰ sauce by her daughter-in-law and is captured by the missing while going to her garden in the
afternoon, in the same way that Genipa Flower’s mother is refused chili by her daughter-in-law, leading
to her capture in Irene’s story. While in Irene’s tale, the arrival at the House of the Missing is entirely
accidental, in Raquel’s story it is the result of curiosity. Yitai arrives there before his mother and
following his daughter’s sudden death, an event which leaves him consumed by grief in such a way that
he abstains from eating for three months and only consumes coca and tobacco to learn what has
happened to her. After three such months he leaves his house, thin and weak. A broad path takes him
“below” (kaknka) to a big maloca, where he sees his daughter and many other people whom he knows to
be long dead. Happy to reunite with him, his daughter offers him caguana beverage which he refuses,
and the maloquero offers him coca powder and tobacco paste which he likewise rejects. During the days
he stays there he only consumes the coca and tobacco that he has brought with him and sees another
newcomer arriving every couple of minutes. The maloca residents are happy to receive those who were
good people, whose loss is lamented by the “People of Above” (kadaiño̰e), directing them to the right
side of the house. Conversely, they transform into harmless stones, devoid of agency, those newcomers
known to be wrongdoers in their previous life, laying them at the left side of the maloca, lest they try
transgressing against their new kin as well. After several days there, the man in charge of pounding the
coca leaves, who recognizes Yitai from his previous life “above,” offers to take him back home, leads
him to the path through which he arrived, and warns him against looking behind or telling people what
he has seen there. Yitai takes chili, achiote fruits, and mḭʼno̰éi herbs for sorcery that he sees around the
maloca, and after the coca pounder leaves him, he cannot resist looking back and seeing that man
running away in the form of a tapir. Yitai continues walking until finding himself in a pond surrounded
by mauritia palms (a cananguchal), which he realizes to be the entrance to that maloca. From there, he
easily finds the way home, where he accepts food and drinks from his wife, a sign that he has finally
overcome his daughter’s death, but does not tell her or anyone else what he saw. When his mother
disappears a few months later and he sees her footprints leading to the mauritia palm pond and her
basket lying on the ground, he understands what has happened to her, and is not absorbed by grief,

313

because he knows that he will meet her there again someday in the future. This finally happens after he
breaks his promise, telling people what he has seen in that house, and then dies.
Similarly to Irene’s story, Raquel’s story about the House of the Missing is also a cautionary tale,
conveying the widespread Amazonian belief that excessive grief and remembrance of the deceased pose
a threat to their living relatives (Karadimas 1999; Taylor 1993b). However, while Irene’s story depicts
the arrival at the House of the Missing as an accident to be avoided at all costs, Raquel’s story contains
three elements that suggest an alternative interpretation where people may intentionally venture into that
house to acquire knowledge and skills. These elements are the hero’s intentional fast to detach himself
from living kin to learn about his daughter; the mention of remedy fruits and particularly the shamanic
mḭʼno̰éi herb he takes when leaving the house, and his name, Yitai, whose meaning Raquel claimed to
ignore, but that Fisi often translates as “training” or “initiation,” as the verb yita means “to learn/study.”
Despite this, Raquel’s narrative suggest that Yitai’s apprenticeship was driven by potentially dangerous
curiosity and uncontrolled feelings. Conversely, Fisi clearly expressed to me the intentional, trainingrelated approach to the House of the Missing.
I learned about this interpretation when I returned to the Andoque reserve after a short stay in Bogotá in
March 2019. During my stay in Bogotá, I had my own mystic experience involving the use of
psychotropic substances and a strong sensation of visiting during the trip the House of the Missing,
which had captured my imagination throughout my fieldwork. The following month, during a
mambeadero session at Fisi’s maloca, I shared my experience with him and his sons, seeking validation
of my own interpretation of the event or any other insights they may have had. Although my narration
was followed by cumbersome silence, the following afternoon, while he was lying in his hammock, Fisi
called me to teach me about that enigmatic house (T3, Fisi, 13/4/19):
“One can arrive there when one gets drunk with yagé (ayahuasca) or wild tobacco. What one sees in these trips is
real. In the beginning, all animals were crickets, sɒ’sɒ: beetle-cricket, ant-cricket, deer-cricket, acouchi-cricket,
armadillo-cricket. After them came the clans: beetle, deer, ant… These were already the Piercers, those who spoke,
who knew fire, who knew the pot [for toasting], trees [for construction], names [who started naming things], they
started building houses. Because the houses [that existed] before them [those of the animal-crickets] were piles of
leaves and thorns, like the leaves of that coconut plant that grows over there, in the forest. Whenever they tried to do
something good, it turned out malign; this is why the Piercers transformed them into animals when they cursed them
with the Creator’s word. They transformed them into white-lipped peccaries, collared peccaries, deer, tapirs, to be
able to do good things [once they were consumed]. We, the descendants of the Piercers, speak better than they did,
we only eat food cooked by fire and no longer eat raw meat, while the forest fruits are left for animals—mauritia and

314

all other fruits. But if we kill too many game animals, I need to go there [to the forest] and give them [the animals]
something in return for what we’ve killed; and then I become a captain. And if I don’t repay them, their god, what
we call the diablo, nhaJ́tiɵ̋ (“that which was made for them”) will take me in exchange for the animals I’ve killed.
Then someone else, one of my sons, or even you, if you drink yajé, can arrive to that house and see me. [Inside the
house people ask you:] ‘Do you want to eat?’ [You say:] ‘No.’ [They ask:] ‘Do you want coca?’ [You say:] ‘No.’ If
you don’t eat, you don’t mambeate (mambear: consume coca), you win. [They say:] ‘Ah, you came for that… This
is a remedy, take it, this is what you need to do [to use it]. This is remedy. That is a maleficium. That is a
maleficium. And that’s it.’ Then your drunkenness passes, and you leave the house, and ask yourself: ‘But where am
I?’ You’re outside, then you find the path in which you have come, you walk it, and then you find yourself at your
house. Then you recall: they showed me this herb, they showed me that herb... You go looking for it, find it, and
then you use it, but you cannot tell anyone; you can only use it. This is the principle for us, in our territory, who
knows how it works in the Uitoto territory? So, when you told me about the people you saw there [during my own
experience], I recalled of them. But those are the dead of Bogotá, who knows what happened to them, how they
died, why they arrived there... And the next time you go there, they will teach you things.”

Fisi’s explanation makes three important contributions to our discussion. First, it highlights that human
beings who have been killed and affinized by nonhumans can also play a positive role as mediators
between living people and nonhuman guardians of spells and remedies. Second, it reveals that living
humans can arrive voluntarily at the House of the Missing, particularly during initiation processes, such
as the one I experienced as an anthropologist studying the Andoque traditions. This contrasts with the
popular interpretation of the House of the Missing as a place to be avoided, because ritual specialists and
captains seek to enter this dangerous place during apprenticeship to gain knowledge, as they are
confident in their ability to leave it voluntarily after acquiring it. It is revealing that the person who
provided me with this interpretation, was Fisi, the person whose authority and possession of traditional
knowledge is the most widely acknowledged by other Andoque members. Fisi’s explanation shows that
apprenticeship and the acquisition of ritual knowledge and power depend on the ability to resist
affinization by nonhumans and to selectively incorporate nonhuman features. If we consider the House
of the Missing as a spatial model for the dynamics of human-nonhuman familiarization that have been
explored throughout this chapter, then Fisi’s explanation shows that a person’s capacity to master
nonhumans and exploit their powers is represented by their ability to actively go in and out of the House
of the Missing, rather than being passively caught there, which represents familiarization by nonhumans.
Finally, Fisi’s statement that a person capable of warding off harms by nonhuman beings becomes a
captain underscores the interconnection between this position and people’s protection from nonhumans.
This connection is also manifested in the other direction: a captain’s prestige and capacity of mobilizing

315

people depends on his demonstrated success in preventing predation by nonhumans, particularly through
the ultimate means of managing relations with them—i.e., ceremonial dances, as will be explored in
Chapter 11. Conversely, a captain’s failure to protect his personnel from the nonhuman world would
result in decline in his prestige and following.
In the next chapter, we will examine the secrecy commanded by the coca pounder in Raquel’s story and
the nonhuman teachers dwelling in the house in Fisi’s explanation, as part of a larger discussion of interhuman power dynamics and the ways in which they are affected by human-nonhuman dynamics.

316

Chapter 10. Power Dynamics Among Human Centers
Having explored the power dynamics among human and nonhuman centers in the previous chapter, this
chapter shifts our focus to relations among human ones, which are organized around notions and
practices of kinship more explicitly than human-nonhuman relations. Deviating from the Dravidian
model prevalent in most Amazonian societies, the Andoque’s cognatic kinship system considers all
relatives on both parental sides as consanguine kin, but also contains an inherent agnatic bias, where
members of one’s clan—whose membership typically follows the father—are considered “more kin.”
We shall recall that, in the past, besides war captives, “orphan” maloca residents who were the
maloquero’s matrilateral kin or otherwise relatives not pertaining to his patriclan, could be traded as
slaves. From the perspective of any given individual, the members of other clans, including consanguine
kin, and even more so those members of other ethnic groups, have a different origin and formation
(haǵtı̋ o) from their own. The Andoque cosmo-social relations can be described by a concentric model: an
agnatic core followed by cognatic consanguinity, then real affinity and, finally, the alterity of enmity and
potential affinity:

Figure 19. The concentric model of the Andoque’s cosmo-social relations

Two Andoque terms designate the unknown Other: yóʼo and saámḭ. Yóʼo means “enemy,” as well as any
Indigenous or non-Indigenous person who is not related to the speaker by blood or marriage, and who

317

represents potential danger. Children were once cautioned by their parents to avoid irritating visiting
strangers, who, as yóʼo, may bewitch them. On the other hand, saámḭ is the term employed by figures in
Andoque myths—animals in their former or parallel mode of existence as humans—to address unknown
or non-kin figures. When narrating these myths today, Andoque members translate saámḭ using the term
paisano, following the colloquial use of the word among Indigenous people in Colombia for other
Indigenous individuals. However, outside the mythical context, the term saámḭ most frequently means
“lover”—a person with whom one engages in sexual activity outside the social norms of accepted
marriage practices—and, more generally, can also designate non-kin with whom relations are not
regulated and are characterized by mocking. Bridging the gap between the mythical and current use of
the term is the notion of potential affinity that exists among human groups lying outside the scope of
consanguinity and real marital alliances, and which extends to nonhuman entities with whom marriage
per se cannot be contracted and thus matrimonial exchange takes other, a-social forms, such as
predation. Indeed, mythology frequently attests to slippage between the two practices among its
“humanized animal” figures. Hence, between yóʼo and saámḭ, the image of the Other ranges from an
enemy to a sexual partner, whose respective unpredictable dangers and seductive forces derive from
their existence outside one’s kinship network.
In this chapter, I address the two interrelated questions: What are the power dynamics between people
pertaining from different centers with distinct origins, and how do these dynamics influence, and are
influenced by, the previously examined relations with nonhumans? The following sections discuss
themes such as women exchange, anthropophagy, incest, sorcery, ritual competition, and secrecy.
Through these discussions, I explore how Andoque members attempt to achieve asymmetries in
appropriating bodies and agencies from other Andoque and non-Andoque clans in their vicinity or on
their ancestral land, and how they counteract similar efforts by rival centers. I argue that these dynamics
unfold against the backdrop of antagonistic relations with nonhuman beings. Rival human centers are
perceived as continuous with nonhuman ones or instrumentalized in managing relations with them. This
antagonism also impacts the tension between agnatic and cognatic principles, a topic underexplored
among the People of the Center, that helps understanding the significance of the clan and affinal
exchanges for these people. By highlighting the continuity between inter-human interactions and the
human-nonhuman asymmetries explored in the previous chapter, this chapter aims to reveal the
complexity of power dynamics among diverse agentive centers. Additionally, I highlight how these
dynamics play out within a historical context marked by demographic decline and recovery efforts, the
318

depletion of oral traditions, the rise of modern representative politics, and significant changes in
marriage practices. I thus try to capture several main contemporary dynamics and reconstruct previous
ones insofar as their underlying logic helps understanding today’s reality.
Lumping together Andoque and non-Andoque clan centers is not without problems. In recent history,
members of surviving Andoque clans lived in proximity and shared economic and ritual activities, and
most of today’s elders who are versed in different traditions were initiated by the same man—namely,
Yiñékɒ. This shared history causes the Andoque to sometimes view members of other clans as sharing a
center with them, while in other contexts, they see them as belonging to different centers. While Yiñékɒ
strove to establish one Andoque center headed by one captain in the aftermath of the rubber genocide
(Chapter 4), my interlocutors assert that he foresaw a moment in the future when population growth
would require multiple captains, each one leading his own clan, and prepared individuals from younger
generations to eventually lead their clans. Even Fisi, who typically upholds the previously mentioned
claim that the Andoque have always had only one sole cacique, acknowledged on different occasions,
like other members, the internal strife among Andoque clans. If not in quality, then in degree, other
Andoque centers emerge as distinct from non-Andoque ones—they are perceived as less dangerous.
Marital exchange is often preferred with them, and sharing knowledge with them is seen as less risky.
Power Dynamics in View of the Human-Nonhuman Continuum
Power dynamics among human actors cannot be understood separately from the adversarial interactions
between humans and nonhumans explored in the previous chapter. Travelers in the nineteenth century
remarked on warfare among ethnic groups in the Caquetá-Putumayo region, often involving the capture
of wives or individuals of both sexes for the slave trade or cannibalistic consumption (Marcoy 1869,
386; Crévaux 1883, 371, 375; von Spix and von Martius 1981 [1831], 235, 244–45). While the Andoque
sometimes married individuals of other ethnic groups, they preferred to obtain spouses from other
Andoque clans. Consequently, they were more alarmed by raids from other clans seeking women than
by slave raids led by the Murui-Muina and Carijona (Jara 1995, 157). My interlocutors often mentioned
rampant pre-genocide warfare among the Andoque clans, both through overt and covert means, the latter
including summoning epidemics to annihilate entire rival clans, such as the Tinamou and Bat Clans,
which were eradicated by measles before the Casa Arana period (see also Gómez López et al. 1998,
122–23). Venturing into another clan’s territory could have deadly repercussions, as evidenced by
stories passed down to my interlocutors from their ancestors. Even accidental run-ins between different

319

clans on forest paths could spiral into violence, leading to murder or rape. Regardless of whether these
conflicts resulted in the capture of slaves, wives, or human bodies for consumption, the primary goal of
this violence was to strengthen one’s clan by appropriating external persons and bodies, who could then
be offered to external agents, either non-Indigenous or nonhuman, as slaves or human sacrifice, in
exchange for material or spiritual support.
As was demonstrated in Chapter 4, the post-genocide recuperation process involved changes to
mythology that were aimed at downplaying aggressions and antagonism among Andoque clans and
instead emphasize these clans’ shared destiny, centered on economic activity and exchange with nonIndigenous agents. Landaburu illustrated this shift through the myth on the war of the Speaking Tree,
where the enemy fighting the center—the center being the Eagle Clan, as the narrator belonged to that
clan—transitioned from the Deer Clan to Egret of the River Mouth (1993, 148). Nevertheless,
antagonism and suspicion between clans persist to this day. When a man from the Sun Clan and his wife
relocated to the Atta Ant settlement after a family tragedy, onlookers from other clans opined that he
was making a big mistake, as these new neighbors would do anything, even steal his wife, because they
belonged to another clan and were endowed with a different thinking, a different principle (otro
principio).
The pervasive suspicion toward members of other clans and ethnic groups is deeply connected to the
predatory dynamics between human and nonhuman beings, as discussed in the previous chapter. People
often doubt others’ capacity to resist these predatory influences, suspecting they might be dominated by
nonhumans, or at least are more susceptible to such domination, rather than being in control themselves.
A common way to express this is by referring to others’ “lack of faith” (no tienen fe), which translates
the quality of not being a hnnna̰kńní, or “yessayer.” This shortcoming alludes to the weakness of the
tutelary spirit (yono̰píi) and a lack of adherence to their clan’s teachings. Often, after telling me about
the dangers caused by powerful nonhuman beings, my interlocutor would say: “but today, people no
longer believe in that; for them, everything is a lie (la gente ya no lo cree; para ellos, todo es mentira).”
Those “people” would typically be members of other families and clans, including elders, as well as
younger people from the speaker’s own family. Those “non-believers” are said to go hunting even in
ominous weather conditions, or feed their children game that should be avoided for the young. A lack of
faith is often cited as a reason why some individuals overhunt, overfish, or neglect to make necessary
offerings to owner-persons, explaining both the tragic retaliation exacted on these people by the latter, as
well as their frequent encounters with diablos and other malevolent beings. As was discussed in Chapter
320

9, the patient’s “faith” (hnnḛ́’ḭ́ ) in the Creator and the healer’s power is vital for the success of healing
procedures, as it signifies the patient’s adherence to humanity and rejection of consubstantiality with
nonhumans. Conversely, a person’s lack of faith in the teachings of the patriclan and the broader human
group—subsumed under “one’s origin”—along with their disregard for warnings, indicates the
weakness of their tutelary spirit and increased susceptibility to falling prey to nonhumans.
In Londoño’s analysis of how the Féénemɨna perceive nonhuman predation on humans, he notes that
people’s critiques of others for exhibiting “animal speech” and being dominated by animals aim at
correcting the immoral and asocial behavior of the criticized individual and ratifying common moral
standards (2012, 48–68). However, the accounts that I heard from Andoque members of the
susceptibility of other people to familiarization by nonhumans were expressed behind these people’s
backs and as such could not serve to correct their behavior. While such accounts might serve to reinforce
moral standards among listeners, they must also be considered within the broader context that involves
competition for power and prestige between clans and maloquero families. Within this context, a
narrator may attempt to question or deny the legitimacy of the criticized person to lead others or hold
ritual activities. To follow such a person or allow him to carry out ritual would entail not only social
problems, but may also result in illnesses, accidents, and death.
For example, after repeatedly hearing from the members of a certain maloca that a publication by
another anthropologist was “full of lies,” I bought a copy in Bogotá and read it in their maloca. That
anthropologist had primarily collected her data among the members of another clan, and my hosts were
eager to point out inconsistencies with their clan’s traditions, referring to them as “lies.” When I read
aloud that clan’s version of a myth, which diverged in some crucial respects from the version that they
had previously shared with me, my hosts concluded: “If they are telling this story in this way, it’s no
wonder the X [an animal, one of the beautiful and dangerous beings] always hangs around their
settlement!”
It should be emphasized here that the attribution of specific misfortunes to attacks or retaliation by
nonhuman entities, which was discussed in the previous chapter, is far from unanimous among Andoque
members, with the divergent interpretations of the same mishap reflecting claims about other members’
inferior competence to manage relationships with these entities. Rubio’s* insanity, mentioned in the
previous chapter, illustrates this well. Members of other clans view this sudden mental decline as part of
a series of retaliatory strikes by a powerful site-person against Rubio’s clan, following gold excavations

321

inland that had not been authorized by this site-person. Conversely, his own clan, particularly the
excavation leader, attributes his episodes to his past work on a gold mining raft, associating them with
heavy drinking during that time.
Similarly, some interlocutors attributed the health issues faced by two individuals, as well as a violent
confrontation between two brothers that took place shortly after a ceremonial dance, to another
maloquero’s failure to properly organize the dance and provide its owner-person with the appropriate
offerings. Conversely, members of the host maloca argued that these health problems started a long time
before the dance and the violent conflict had many causes, including sorcery done years earlier to one of
the brothers involved in it. In this manner, attributing misfortunes to attacks by nonhumans suggests a
non-differentiation between the victim (or their family members) and nonhuman entities, as the latter
cannot control exchange with these entities and are purportedly prone to being familiarized by them,
potentially putting others at risk. Conversely, attributing such mishaps to other factors denies this
continuity.
Non-Andoque Indigenous individuals can also be suspected of insufficient knowledge that exposes them
(and others) to harms from nonhumans. While interlocutors often express appreciation of their nonAndoque Indigenous relatives or friends who are well acquainted with their ancestral territories and their
site-persons and can thus safely lead these Andoque fellows through it, they also note that some
neighboring Indigenous communities are inauthentic and lack such fundamental knowledge. This is
because they no longer speak their respective native language but have adopted that of another group, or
they do not speak it correctly, which they believe impedes proper engagement in spiritual dialogues to
ensure well-being. Other communities are said to have lost this knowledge because of their early
exposure to non-Indigenous schooling, and yet other individuals and communities living outside their
ancestral lands—such as those living within the Andoque’s ancestral territory—are thought to lack the
essential knowledge needed to conduct appropriate ritual procedures specific to their current location.
As explored in Chapter 8, such claims are linked to land claims. However, they should also be
understood within the framework where nonhuman entities are an agentive side in territorial
contestations because one’s failure to conduct necessary ritual procedures within the territory reflects
one’s vulnerability to nonhuman aggressiveness.
Beyond merely suspecting that members of other clans and especially non-Andoque groups are potential
victims to nonhuman aggressiveness, my interlocutors mentioned ways to actively turn them into such

322

victims. In Chapter 7, we discussed the victimization of other people in the context of human-nonhuman
relations, whereby a dreamer transfers their ominous dream elsewhere to spare themselves and their kin
from predation and familiarization by nonhumans by exposing other people to them. This scheme of
action manifests in other contexts where a person may seek to assimilate other human centers to
nonhuman ones in order to divert such fate from themselves. For instance, if the theme of the
dangerously seductive dolphins arises during a mambeadero session in a manner that might summon
these beings to seek out and attack any of the attendees or their kin, participants may laugh about the
sexual promiscuity of a distant individual—often a woman—so that the eavesdropping dolphins pursue
this indication and affect their harms elsewhere, away from the present gathering. Another illustration of
this tactic is the reported past practice of dicing the meat of large pests, such as collared peccaries, that
ravaged people’s gardens and distributing it among others. This was done so that the animals would be
drawn to the gardens of those who received the meat, thereby sparing the gardens of the original victims.
My interlocutors also described this practice as one of the principles of an englobing Amazonian geocosmopolitics. As Nestor explained to me during a mambeadero conversation that took place a day after
a severe gun incident that cost a teen his life:
“Every Indigenous people—the Uitoto, the Miraña, the Yucuna, everyone—when its elders notice that something goes
wrong, that the weather (tiempo) becomes dangerous, they talk about it in the mambeadero. When they meet, they
mambeate (ellos mambean), they tell stories, they ask each other: ‘What do you think about the weather?’ [after
hearing the answer, they say:] ‘ahhh, this is so’ (así es). This way, they analyze the weather together, and they push
away the bad thing elsewhere (empujan la maldad a otra parte), so it will happen there, and not where they live. And
this way every group with its elders pushes the weather along the river. And because here [among the Andoque] the
elders do not convene and mambeate and analyze the weather [together], all these bad things befall the Andoque, who,
on top of that, live right in the middle between the Yucuna and the peoples of the Mirití and Apaporis [Rivers], and
the Uitoto and the Putumayo [River]. Each people turns to its own god in its own language, and this god does both
good and evil, one cannot tell him ‘Don’t do evil,’ one simply asks him to do it elsewhere.”119

Indigenous elders from all nations are believed to not only push away evils to protect themselves but
also to bring about misfortunes similar to those happening to themselves during times of grief. During
the same mambeadero conversation, the members of the household discussed a murder that had occurred

119

The beliefs underpinning this practice mirror another widespread Amazonian idea: that life, souls, and vital energy are
limited and scarce, and as such they merely circulate among beings, who, unable to create new ones, must appropriate them
from others (Santos Granero 2009b, 14; Taylor 1993b, 658).

323

in Araracuara about three weeks earlier, where a Murui-Muina man had killed a Yucuna. “This made
everything dangerous,” Nestor explained to me, “one must be cautious. We the Indigenous, when
something like that happens to us, it’s not from sorcery, but from sorrow that we say: ‘Why is it
happening to us? The one who makes fun of it (burlar)—let it happen to him! And we push that thing
elsewhere.” For this reason, my interlocutors emphasized, both on this and other occasions, that upon
receiving such grim news, it is important to express sympathy for the victim and their family. If one fails
to do so, yá’dosé—the mournful spirit of their powerful elder relatives that roams the vast stretches of
the region’s forest on nights of grief—might target and afflict the unsympathetic individual with a
similar misfortune. This demonstrates how the boundary between humanity and nonhumanity, which
people are reluctant to cross, renders kinship distinctions among humans (kin, affine, non-kin) more
flexible and relative, highlighting their performative nature. While the transfer of misfortunes elsewhere
is rooted in, and reinforces, the perception of those people as non-kin, who can thus be delivered to
malevolent nonhuman forces, expressing empathy towards those suffering, whether near or far, is a
strategic move, by which an individual identifies with the victim as kin to exclude him or herself from
the predatory rage of the mourners.
Transforming other human beings into prey for nonhuman entities, thereby pushing them outside the
realm of humanity, also has implications for the relationship between the agent facilitating this
transformation and the nonhuman predator. As discussed in the previous chapter, sorcery involves
offering human victims to nonhuman entities, in a way that contributes to establishing or maintaining an
asymmetrical familiarization between the sorcerer and the relevant nonhuman entity. The
anthropophagous dances antedating the rubber genocide are arguably another example of the use of
other human beings to nurture asymmetrical relations with nonhumans. Certainly, these dances,
common throughout the Caquetá-Putumayo, were rich in symbolism and, like other rituals, cannot be
reduced to one function or meaning. Similar to their neighbors, the Andoque are not eager to talk about
these dances nowadays and did not provide me with more than a few partial and contradictory accounts
passed down to them by their parents and grandparents. Like Pineda’s Murui-Muina sources (2005,
226), my interlocutors maintain that the victims in these dances could be both prisoners from other
groups and transgressive group members, with the corresponding objectives of terrorizing external
enemies and disciplining group members by making justice known, respectively. Contrary to what is
described in Marcoy’s testimony concerning the Miraña (1869, 387) and in Karadimas’ reconstruction
(2001), my interlocutors did not mention any practice where the prisoner was assigned the role of a son324

in-law. They also did not hint at any process of de-affinization or “de-enemization” of the prisoner,
where his powers might be extracted and assimilated or his body parts used for healing, as described in
relation to other groups (García 2018, 140–42, 298–312; Karadimas 2001, 86, 161; Lucas 2019, 123–27;
Pineda Camacho 2005, 232–24), although we cannot rule out that such beliefs and practices existed
among the Andoque as well.
Andoque members concur that these dances were organized by powerful shamans, who used them to
communicate with Sı̰ ́di, the cosmic cannibal principle and leader of jaguars—the Andoque counterpart
to the god Juziñamui, to whom human sacrifices were made in the Murui-Muina dances (Pineda
Camacho 2005). They also described the communication with Sı̰ ́di as crucial for gaining the ability to
heal extremely severe illnesses and deformities, such as hɵpɵ yayo’fía (“anaconda egret”), bei yayo’fía
(“fish egret”) and tiḭsu yo’fí (“animal transformation egret”), which are inflicted by the owner-persons of
anacondas, fish, and animals as retribution for harming their respective protégés. Here a comparison
with evidence concerning the Murui-Muina may also be revealing. In the cannibal chants of this group,
the singer (and flesh consumer) identifies as Father Buinaima and expresses the intention to eat the
victim, referred to as Buinaima, in the form of various fruits and fish. Buinaima occupies in the MuruiMuina mythology a somewhat equivalent position to the Andoque’s Egret (Yo’fí), in being the son of
Juziñmui (who is also referred to as the Creator) who establishes order and culture (García 2018, 122,
n.108, 159; Urbina Rangel 2010, 41),120 and thus stands for captaincy in the same way that Yo’fi does so
in Andoque discourse. According to García, these chants include a dual game of “de-enemization” and
“re-enemization” of the victim, where he is portrayed as a distinct captain, and, as such, a powerful
affine, before he is consumed as a fish or fruit—an entity with lesser retaliatory agency—by a captain
positioned vertically above him in a consanguineal relationship (Father Buinaima) (2018, 303–4). It is
possible that the Andoque participants in anthropophagous dances in the past acquired the capacity to
heal severe yo’fí illnesses and disfigurations by identifying the victim with the captain (yo’fí) of aquatic
and terrestrial animals. Consequently, by consuming the human victim, they could prey on these
powerful nonhuman entities and thus heal or reverse the harms inflicted by them. The symbolic
consumption of the owner-person, required to heal a human who has been severely disfigured or made
ill by that owner-person as recompense for harm to its nonhuman creatures, makes the cannibalistic
dances a clear representation of homosubstitutive logic. Interestingly, without these dances, the yo’fí

120

Several Murui individuals married to Andoque members also pointed this equivalence out to me.

325

afflictions are now considered incurable, hinting at the limits of compensation through heterosubstitutive
offerings.
The healing capacity granted through cannibalistic consumption does not only depend on
communication with Sı̰ ́di, but also on commensality with him. My interlocutors described how
participants used to emit growls resembling voracious jaguars during these dances and were required to
maintain a certain distance from each other to avoid contact with other dancers. Any physical contact or
stumbling, as well as faltering singing voices, were regarded as omens indicating that that individual
would be the next victim. In addition to the general significance of stumbles and faltering voices as
ominous signs during any dance (see Chapter 7), the distinctiveness of this ceremony lies in the
prohibition against touching other dancers. This sets it apart from other dances where physical contact
between dancers is common, such as male dancers holding hands or female companions placing their
hands on them. This practice, along with the growling sounds and the consumption of human flesh,
contributes to the transformation of the dancers-consumers from social human beings into jaguars,
which are solitary predators. The transformation into jaguars appears to have aligned the participants
with Sı̰ ́di, who consumed human flesh through their mediation, much like offerings to owner-persons in
ceremonial dances and other contexts are mediated through their consumption by the human
participants. This shows that one of the purposes of the literal predation of past Andoque people on other
human beings enabled to appropriate the forces of nonhuman entities such as Sı̰ ́di to establish
asymmetrical familiarizing relations with other nonhuman entities, which in turn acted to prevent
counter-predation on the consumers and their kin.
As per the information shared by Fisi with Jara (1995, 157), the victims chosen for anthropophagous
dances at times included prisoners who were captured in retaliatory raids following the abduction of
women. This connection underscores the link between cannibalism and marital exchange, as well as the
connection between negative reciprocity and symmetrical forms of alliance. It also highlights the
broader affinal nature of rival human centers, which will be discussed in the next section.
Predation and Influence Between Affinal Centers
Women could be given to the party that has lost kin to cannibal consumption, and marital exchange has
served, until recently, as compensation following fatal aggressions, in order to prevent future reprisals
and counter-reprisals. I learned of three such cases from oral historical accounts by my interlocutors,
spanning from the 1950s to the 1980s. These cases involved Murui or Féénemɨna individuals who asked

326

Andoque fathers to give them their daughters as wives, either for themselves or their sons. These
requests were based on past murders committed by the father’s relative against the non-Andoque’s
relative, whether involving cannibalistic consumption or not. This practice is compensatory in that the
woman of the transgressing party contributes to the reproduction of the aggrieved party. The negative
reciprocity becomes symmetrical, paving to way for a more extended alliance between families that
includes additional matrimonial exchange. This is evident in the case of the Atta Ant Clan and the
aggrieved Féénemɨna family. After an Atta Ant woman married a Féénemɨna man, the latter’s mixed
Féénemɨna-Murui female relative married the brother of the Atta Ant bride.
This practice reflects the ideal of homosubstitutive exchange among Indigenous human centers.
Whereas humans could be traded for goods with Whites during the slave trade, and nonhuman ownerpersons can accept vegetal offerings as compensation for their animals, among Indigenous clans, as my
interlocutors have noted on several occasions, “a life can only be paid through another life” (una vida
solo se paga con otra vida).121 To my knowledge, there was but one heterosubstitutive marital transaction
in the Andoque’s recent history: in the early 1950s, an Andoque man persuaded the Féénemɨna widow
of a Murui-Muina man to marry him, compensating her brother-in-law, who had intended to enact the
levirate, with a rifle.
The homosubstitutive logic also underlies marital exchange that occurs after the successful healing of
severe illnesses, where a relative of the recovered patient gives a wife to the healer or his son. I was told
of two such cases, the first dating to the 1960s, when Yiñékɒ offered his daughter Irene to a MuruiMuina man who saved the life of her brother Rodolfo, and another dating to the 1990s, involving a man
from the Atta Ant Clan who gave his daughter to the son of a healer responsible for saving his niece’s
life. Beyond sincere expression of gratitude, we can also discern in this practice an effort to avoid
expressing ingratitude towards a person who, as an accomplished healer, is often also suspected to
possess potent sorcery abilities. Such a healer may harbor resentment upon witnessing the female
relatives of those he has saved marrying into other families, while he or his sons remain unmarried.
Consequently, he may bewitch these women or their kin.
While marriage alliance can serve to prevent aggressions and predation, they are also imbued with
predatory logics, just as predatory dynamics with nonhumans reflect principles of affinal exchange. Real

Interestingly, the noun ḭnhḛ́sói applies to the two human objects of exchange, both slaves and wives (Andoque Andoque
and Landaburu, forthcoming).
121

327

affines are recognized as centers with a similar agency to ego’s, who refers to their co-parents-in-law as
oño̰e, or “persons.” Like site-persons (’i’bo ño̰e), affines represent the independent, dangerous agency
epitomized by the jaguar (ḭño̰). Similar to the jaguar and the site-persons, parents-in-law may “devour”
their children’s spouses. In previous chapters we encountered various myths in which the father-in-law
is the predatory Sun, intent on consuming his sons-in-law. These myths resemble Miraña mythical
narratives featuring jaguar fathers-in-law (Karadimas 2005b, 161) and are typical of the Amazonian
affinal asymmetry between father-in-law and son-in-law, and the expectation of reciprocity, where the
groom remains at risk of being consumed himself, e.g., through brideservice, as long as he does not
compensate his father-in-law with a counter-transfer of a woman to be consumed by one of his sons
(Viveiros de Castro 1993, 190–91). However, we also encountered myths in which the father-in-law is
Shadow Egg, who occupies a position of prey vis-à-vis his sons-in-law. Like site-persons, parents-in-law
are not only predatory agents, but also the owners of “game”—i.e., men and women whom other
individuals can seize and “consume,” both as spouses and workers at their malocas. A marriage alliance
thus involves a predatory struggle between a father-in-law and son-in-law over the reciprocity in the
transfers and counter-transfers of women, but also as to whether either side manages to impose its
project on the other and incorporate the other, or some of its constituents, to its group, thereby turning
them into its workers—or “orphans,” a notion to which we will return below.
Upon marriage, spouses refer to their fathers-in-law as se or suegro and to their mothers-in-law as sóɨ or
suegra, but they often address them using consanguineal terms, such as bɵbɵ or papá (“father”) and iyo
or mamá (“mother”). Similarly, the brothers of the parents-in-law can be addressed as “uncles” (yodɨ;
tio), and their sisters as “mothers.” The underlying logic of “upwards familiarization” behind this
divesting of affines of their affinity (Viveiros De Castro 2001, 24; see also Taylor 1983), becomes more
apparent with the use of the term ’baó to adress parents-in-law and their siblings, a term that is not used
today due to the dwindling use of the native language among young people. My elder interlocutors
explain that ’baó is also the term through which parents guided their children on how to address their
playmates to promote harmony and prevent quarrels (“this is your ’baó, don’t fight with him”). By
contrast, parents-in-law may use Spanish consanguineal terms to address the spouses of their children,
but not consanguineal terms or the term ’baó in the native language (SW is kn, while DH is ńkɒ).
The Andoque terms for sibings-in-law—opókn for brother-in-law and opómi for sister-in-law—display
more symmetry, and may be derived from the root pó, which signifies clarity and gaze, as seen in no
pó’kni: “I am looking.” This suggests that one’s sibling-in-law is the person with whom one exchanges
328

glances (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm., November 2022). The ideal relationship, as described by
Andoque members, between a man and his brother-in-law centers around mutual visits and collaboration
in maloca construction and garden clearing. However, the collaborative relationship between maloquero
brothers-in-law is infused with notions of rivalry and competition that are less central in relationships
between non-maloquero brothers-in-law.
Distinct from other People of the Center, where a ceremonial alliance can only be formed between two
maloqueros who are unrelated to each other by blood or marriage, or “potential affines” (Gasché 2009,
14), the Andoque consider the actual brother-in-law as the preferred partner for exchanging ceremonies,
a relationship that encompasses both collaboration and competition. These ceremonial partners are
expected to engage in dialogue (pɨsékái, literally: “tell stories”) to assess the weather and imminent
dangers jointly and to consult with one another regarding the rituals essential for the proper management
of the territory. A maloquero’s ceremonial partner is often his ḭtáu’fa, “the one who receives tobacco” to
attend dances organized by the former. As a guest at the dance, the ceremonial partner manifests a
ritualistically antagonistic demeanor (to be explored in Chapter 11) which the host will reciprocate when
it is his turn to serve as the ḭtáu’fa at a ceremonial dance hosted by his partner. This alternation of
ceremonial dances involves a competition that builds prestige for the partners if they successfully
navigate and even surpass the ritual challenges posed by each other, in dynamics that may have
exhibited a more “potlach”-like nature before the rubber upheaval (Gasché 2003). For this reason, a
maloquero’s ceremonial partner should ideally be someone at a similar stage in his ritual career, which
explains the preference for an individual from G+0. However, my interlocutors explained that a
maloquero’s partner cannot be someone who has collaborated with him or his father in dance
organization, presumably because they share similar knowledge and ritual practices that turn this
alliance akin to incest. Engaging in such a partnership is crucial for a maloquero’s progression. My
interlocutors noted that the end of several maloqueros’ ceremonial careers could be traced back to the
loss of their ceremonial partners, whether due to death or emigration.
Similar to how the role of a brother-in-law encompasses both assistance and rivalry, their clan
represents, from a given ego’s point of view, both the opportunity for social reproduction and the risk of
deviation from ego’s own clan principles and traditions. This tension is typical of “house societies,”
where cognatic kinship coexists with patrilineal descent, and societies worldwide, as well as other
People of the Center and the Tukanoan-Arawakan groups of Northwest Amazonia, differ in the relative
weight they give to each of these components (Carsten and Hugh-Jones 1995; Karadimas 2000b, 610–
329

11). This tension is often represented by the in-marrying woman, who embodies, in a patrilineal and
patrilocal society, the perilous agency of her patriclan of origin. “In this sense,” as S. Hugh-Jones
observes for the Tukanoan context, “such women are ‘gifts’—they embody their source” (2013, 370).
This notion has been discussed in Chapter 6 in relation to the concept of “a woman’s word” (tí’i nihɵɵ́i),
which refers both to tasks and substances associated with women and to any sentiment, thought or
advice that is perceived as going against the efforts of men to organize the group and promote what they
perceive to be in the group’s benefit. Egret of the River Mouth epitomizes the vulnerability to “a
woman’s word” because in the myth of “The War of the Speaking Tree” (M4), he fails to carry out his
original plans and cannot control his desire and anger after being distracted by his host’s wife (see
Chapter 1). Women are viewed by men as capable of diverting them from their endeavors to carry out
projects or acquire new skills and knowledge, hence, I was told, a man should only pay attention to or
turn his gaze on women after completing the mission that he has set forth for himself. The perception by
a given man of women as representing the dangerous affinal nature of their origin clans has also been
mentioned in Chapter 6 in relation to the attempts made by the (male) producers and consumers of coca
and tobacco to disentangle these substances from their mythical affinal and feminine associations and to
steer away from feminine influences during their preparation and production, in order to ensure that
these substances serve them as a tool to familiarize others, rather than being familiarized by them.
Various myths reflect the ideal that a woman shows greater allegiance to her husband (and by extension,
the clan to which she marries) than to her origin family and clan. In the myth recounting the origin of
peach palm, the hero obtains this fruit from his aquatic in-laws thanks to his fish wife, who hides one pit
in her vagina—the only place in a woman’s body where a brother should not search (Landaburu and
Pineda 1984, 190–201).122 In the myth of the pipe blower M7 (see Appendix 1), it is the lover himself
whom the woman hides in her vagina to protect him from her brothers. On the other hand, the portrayal
of brothers-in-law as the wives’ lovers in other myths, such as M22 (as well as in M7 according to one
narrator; see footnote 188 in Appendix 1), reflects husbands’ suspicion that their wives have not been
adequately familiarized and that they maintain a greater allegiance to their origin family. From a
feminine point of view, an elder woman told me that women are advised by their parents not to share
their clan’s origin stories or myth versions with their husbands. If a woman happens to hear a myth
version that contradicts the one she is familiar with, she may approach her parents and ask them about
Interestingly, this way of hiding is absent from the Miraña and Bora variants, where the hero hides the pit from his fish
brothers-in-law by swallowing it (Karadimas 2007, 111–12; Lucas 2019, 322.).

122

330

its accuracy. In such cases, the father is likely to reassure her that their own clan’s version is indeed true.
She concluded: “The husband’s people [family] are nothing [son nada], they are different people [otra
gente].”
While intricately linked to a conflictive perception of affinal exchange, the concept of “a woman’s
word” also bears consequences for women’s involvement in contemporary political structures, like the
reserve. Despite some men arguing that this concept should not constrain women’s active engagement in
community assemblies and meetings within the reserve with external agency representatives, several
women emphasized to me that “a woman’s word” indeed conveys exactly that. The average female
attendance at the six internal reserve assemblies, which took place during my research and concerned its
economic management or preparation for meetings with non-Indigenous agents, was six women,
compared to 15 men. Female attendance was higher at two reserve meetings funded by or involving
non-Indigenous agents, which focused on the garden project and women’s association (12 women vs. 11
men at one meeting, 9 vs. 15 at another). Additionally, numerous other meetings funded by external
agents, which included the purchase of local produce from members and its consumption—and, as such,
were also seen as festive social gatherings—also saw higher female attendance. During both internal
assemblies and those with external participants, women tend to sit towards the rear of the maloca (“the
women’s side”) and participate in discussions significantly less than men. My female interlocutors
mentioned that even these rare interventions were absent a few years ago. They attributed this increase
in participation to the influence of Murui-Muina women from La Chorrera, where women are said to
have a more active role in representative organizations. Some of these women either married into the
Andoque community or left an impression of the female members of the reserve due to their active
engagement in regional assemblies that the latter attended. These experiences resonate with accounts of
women’s negotiation of their participation in modern political arenas in other societies in Northwest
Amazonia, as they navigate between new democratic structures and their marginal, even somewhat
external position in relation to their groups as enshrined in regional agnatic ideologies (Rosas Riaño
2021; Rossi Idárraga 2020a; 2020b).
The liberating influence of non-Andoque women on female reserve members is viewed as a threat by
Andoque men and could be interpreted as an embodiment of “a woman’s word” that poses a risk to them
due to its connection with another affinal center—one that is perceived as even more perilous than
competing Andoque clan centers. This dynamic is reflected in the failure of the Indigenous Women
Association of the Andoque People, where such influences seem to have played a role, among other
331

factors. This association emerged from a broader project aimed at ensuring food sovereignty and
preserving sustainable economic practices by revitalizing the women’s work in the gardens. This project
was funded by Parques, as part of this agency’s efforts to secure the consent of the Indigenous neighbors
of its Chiribiquete National Natural Park to the park’s expansion and to promote ecologically sustainable
land uses among the park’s neighbors (see Chapter 8). The project also aimed at empowering women
and upholding the transmission of their traditional knowledge. The first assembly for project
consolidation took place in 2015, where it was decided that the participants would explore Andoque
gardening traditions by clearing together and working in the family gardens of its participants, thereby
reviving the custom of collective garden work (minga), which would culminate with the cultivation of
the garden in the Deer Clan settlement and the subsequent celebration of a Fruit ceremonial dance at
Mario’s maloca. Since many of the adult female reserve members are not of Andoque origin and do not
speak this language, the project participants also sought to promote knowledge of Andoque botanical
nomenclature. This topic gained further weight over time, and at the community assembly that I
attended in May 2018 to bring the association, its objectives, and a scheme of co-funding developed
with Parques to the elders’ authorization, it was already presented as the “preservation of the Andoque
language.”
The focus on language and traditional Andoque knowledge was one of the aspects that deterred
Andoque men, primarily because the association was headed by Lina*, a woman of a neighboring group
married to an Andoque man. Certainly, the association garnered various critics. Some association
members and their spouses voiced concerns about lack of reciprocity in the cycle of family garden
clearings, as well as the perceived diversion of the project’s resources to Lina and her husband’s family.
Other members criticized her alleged tyrannic attitude and mistreatment of members, whom she
purportedly treated as her workers. The association members were particularly disappointed to learn that
instead of receiving work tools such as boots and machetes from Parques, Lina had requested the agency
electronic equipment, such as a computer and camera. By contrast, the male participants at the assembly
were primarily concerned about the association’s goals of exploring Andoque botanical knowledge,
engaging with the Andoque language, and preserving ceremonial dances connected to garden work.
Hernando, the reserve governor, stated that the topic of language preservation should be promoted in a
project involving the entire community and all its elders, not just its female members; the elder Rodolfo
hurled that the women try to “touch” something that is “too deep” and will consequently fail; and Mario
complained that the Fruit Dance at his maloca left him indebted to the spirits due to the insufficient
332

contribution of coca and vegetal salt, responsibilities that fell upon the women, and blamed Lina for not
ensuring the proper completion of the required ritual procedures. After these complaints were raised,
Lina addressed the elephant in the room when she said: “I know that some people say, ‘Oh, this X [her
Indigenous group], she came here to give us orders…’ So, if anyone objects to me being the coordinator,
I will resign.” She even offered Raquel, an elder of the Deer Clan, to co-lead the association with her.
None of the participants admitted that their objection was related to Lina’s non-Andoque origin, and one
elder from the Beetle Clan even stated: “Lina is already one of us, she is Andoque.” Lina’s nonAndoque mother-in-law, one of the few in-marrying women to master the Andoque language, asserted
that being born to a different Indigenous origin does not negate allegiance to the Andoque people. “I am
also Andoque already,” she stated, a declaration echoed by several other women of both non-Andoque
and mixed descent. Lina stepped down from leading the association, and Parques’ representative
decided to suspend the project in October, when they attended a meeting where the same disagreements
resurfaced and without any other woman volunteering to replace Lina.
In the weeks following the May assembly, I spoke with various reserve members who maintained that
Lina’s ethnic origin was not relevant to their objection to her leadership. It was only a few months later
that several men said that they could not accept her as the association coordinator due to her nonAndoque origin, as they believed that she attempted to impose her vision on the association and interfere
with Andoque traditions. One elder, in particular, conveyed to me that gardens created through
collective efforts such as those cleared in the project, should be dedicated to ceremonial dances and
other traditional practices encompassed by the term la cultura. The crops they yield should be suitable
not just for basic consumption, but also for contemplation and communication with nonhuman entities.
Therefore, it is crucial that the gardens are cleared, crops are planted, and they grow with the appropriate
mindset. However, according to this elder, this was not the case with the association and its nonAndoque coordinator, whose “thinking was not from here”—from the Andoque territory. This brings us
back to the efforts aimed at familiarizing cultivars so that they can effectively facilitate the subsequent
familiarization of both human and nonhuman entities and serve as a defense against becoming affinized
by these beings. It appears that in addition to usual criticisms of project coordination, like resource
misallocation, Andoque members perceived that the women’s association posed a threat because it was
led by “a woman’s word” that could readily be traced to a rival affinal center.
Therefore, notwithstanding the rivalry and suspicion among Andoque clans, Andoque members
associate other ethnic groups with more acute affinal dangers. However, non-Indigenous others are not
333

homogenous in this respect. Andoque members express more fear, suspicion, and criticism toward
certain neighboring communities than they do toward two small ethnic communities living downriver
from the Aduche Reserve. They explicitly trace this attitude to the critical decades of post-genocide
reconstruction, when the founder families of these communities lived alongside the Andoque or
exchanged women and dance invitations with them, something that was not achieved with the other and
significantly larger Indigenous populations surrounding them. In other words, these smaller
communities represent less hostile affinal centers because they have been familiarized by the Andoque
through past exchange and alliance.123 The existence of prior exchange and consequent familiarity with
certain centers would certainly hold true in respect to other Andoque clans from the point of view of any
Andoque member, accounting for why other Andoque individuals are feared less than non-Andoque
neighbors. For this reason, parents often express the desire that their children would find Andoque
spouses. This tendency stems from the concentric differentiation between consanguines, real affines, and
non-kin, and may represent a modern manifestation, expressed through the idiom of ethnicity, of the
more ingrained preference among the People of the Center to marry those who are genealogically closest
to ego among people considered non-consanguine (Gasché 1976; Karadimas 2000; Lucas 2019, 161).
This also manifests in people’s attitude toward ceremonial relationships modeled upon affinal ties,
where members of other Andoque clans are deemed more familiar and thus safer than non-Andoque
individuals. Fisi mentioned that Andoque maloqueros prefer inviting Andoque guests to their ceremonial
dances instead of non-Andoque ones, explaining: “We don’t have sufficient mambe and ambíl, and we
don’t want the others [guests from other groups] to be upset that we invite them if we don’t have
enough. If they sing here and I don’t give them enough mambe and ambíl they can bewitch me. But if I
invite Tañe, I know that he doesn’t have more ambíl than I have, so he won’t be upset with what I give
him.” The theme of sorcery plays a crucial role in the dynamics between affinal centers, and it is to this
theme that we now turn.
De-familiarization Through Incest and Sorcery
The predatory dimension of the Andoque’s perception of marriage is most marked in its association with
sorcery. When José* told me M3, he said that the suitors who preceded Egret of the River Source were
all devoured by the woman’s father after they addressed him as “father-in-law.” “This story teaches one
This information is substantiated by the disproportion observed in my kinship corpus regarding the marriage relations
formed between the Andoque and various ethnic groups, in comparison to the population size of these groups. However, I
have opted not to present this data here to avoid a clearer identification of the specific groups mentioned.

123

334

not to say ‘father-in-law’ to someone who can bewitch him,” he said. For this reason, his son told me,
when he went to La Chorrera to look for a wife and spent a long time with Murui-Muina and Bora
people whose might he feared, he used to call men older than himself as either “uncle” or “grandfather.”
Another elder told me that he used to fear the son-in-law of his classificatory cousin, a strong-bodied
Brazilian gold miner with an unknown past, until the latter started calling him “uncle,” similar to how
this cousin’s children address him. Addressing another man as an affine implies alterity and thus
unpredictibility that may elicit an aggressive stance, while addressing him as a consanguine implies a
more peaceful stance that may elicit from him a more protective approach. This section elucidates how
sorcery, and incest as well, function in the opposite direction, acting to dissociate consanguinity and
treat members of one’s own human center, or an affinally allied one, as non-kin, and engaging in a
predatory exchange with them.
The potential use of the term ño̰e for co-parents-in-law demarcates the extension of ego’s family and the
(ideally) benevolent exchange taking place in it. I will explain this by discussing the Andoque’s incest
prohibitions and previous efforts by anthropologists of neighboring peoples to uncover these societies’
marriage preferences. Similar to other People of the Center, the Andoque consider the marriage of both
real and classificatory cousins within three degrees as incest. For instance, in the figure below, a male
ego [1] cannot marry most of his G+0 relatives, to whom he refers as tii (“sister”) or ḭ́ ekó tii (“poor
sister,” meaning female cousin). The closest matrimony into which he could enter would be with [2],
who can be classified as his cousin, but does not belong to any of the four patriclans of his grandparents.

Figure 20. Marriageable relatives from a male spouse’s perspective (colors: clan membership)

335

The kinship systems of the Caquetá-Putumayo region do not include positive marriage rules as is typical
in Amazonian Dravidianate, although the kinship terminologies of the Andoque’s Miraña and Bora
neighbors contain what Karadimas termed “a Dravidian touch,” where a person employs the same term
to address both their parents-in-law and their parents’ siblings (Karadimas 2000, 611; Lucas 2019, 155;
see also García 2018, 167 n.16). In the Andoque language, this trait is slightly more hidden. The
reference term for father-in-law (WF and HF) is se (in contrast to sóɨ for mother-in-law, WM or HM),
and reference to an uncle (a sibling of either parent, as well as that sibling’s husband) is done through
yodɨ. Both the maternal and paternal aunts are referred to as píta, while the paternal aunt, as well as
one’s MBW, is sen, “the father-in-law’s wife.” Karadimas uses this Dravidian trait as further support in
his argument that the Miraña system may not contain positive marriage rules from the point of view of
an ego seeking marriage for themselves, but, if the point of departure is ego’s parents—who, in the past,
were the ones to seek spouses for their children—then a marriage preference does appear. The parent
would search a spouse for their child among the children of their own classificatory siblings (cousins)
who do not belong to any of the four clans of their child’s grandparents. These potential spouses are thus
classified as the nieces and nephews of the parent of the marrying ego, but would lack a kinship term
from ego’s point of view—therefore, they would not be viewed as kin (Karadimas 2000b, 607).
Thus, if we redraw the figure to consider the parental matchmaker as ego [1], none of the children of
their siblings (referred to as tii for a male ego’s sister, yohɵ for a female ego’s brother, or ɵɵ for any
ego’s same-sex sibling) can serve as spouses. However, the children of their classificatory siblings, who
are the matchmaker’s cousins and, as such, are referred to as “poor siblings” (ḭ́ ekó tii, ḭ́ ekó yohɵ or ḭ́ ekó
’ɵɵ), may be suitable candidates—for example, the children of [2].

336

Figure 21. Marriageable relatives from the perspective of a male spouse’s father (colors: clan membership)

We may suppose that these siblings are “poor” precisely because they may cease being siblings
altogether if their children do not belong to any of the four patriclans of the prospective match, and thus
become—again, from the point of view of the parental matchmaker—co-parents-in-law.124 Their
designation as ño̰e would detach them from the kinship network of the parental matchmaker (and that of
their children), marking them as independent agents counting as a separate human center.
One objection to incestuous relationships is attributed to the partners’ parents, who find it shameful to
call their siblings or real cousins “co-parents-in-law.” This objection is attributed to Pa̰’fó and Pedro,
two cousins from the generation that survived the genocide, whose respective children, Irene and Tañe,
expressed their desire to marry. My interlocutors explained that it was shameful for the parents to start
addressing their cousins as ño̰e because it shows a lack of respect for the cousin. The shameful aspect
appears to be the treatment of kinsperson as independent enough, such that one sees their children, and
ultimately, this kin, as a potential prey for one’s children. However, my interlocutors told me that Pedro
and Yiñékɒ, Pa̰’fó’s husband, agreed to simply ignore this marriage on the level of terminology, and
kept adressing each other as “brother-in-law,” while Pa̰’fó and Pedro remained “cousins.”
In Karadimas and Lucas’ analyses of the Miraña and Bora kinship systems, the “Dravidian touch” is
also connected to the maloqueros’ custom during the slave trade to select both potential spouses for their
children and “orphans” to be exchanged with outsiders for metal instruments and other goods from the

For Murui-Muina and Bora references to cousins as weakened or “external” versions of siblings, see Gasché 1976, 153
and Lucas 2019, 163.

124

337

category of “nephews” (furthermore, in the Miraña language, the term for “orphan” is very similar to
“nephew”; Karadimas 2001, 93; Lucas 2019, 207–09). A maloquero’s classificatory nephew born from a
union with one of the maloquero’s female relatives and thus belonging to another patriclan, could
become an orphan if he were to live in this maloquero’s house due to various reasons, instead of residing
in his own patriclan’s maloca. In this situation, being a relatively distant non-member of the
maloquero’s clan, he could potentially be sold into slavery. The Andoque term for co-parents-in-law
also illustrates how a classificatory nephew-turned-spouse can transition into a state of “orphanhood.”
Similar to how an orphan (’ihɵ́ɵ) lacks the predatory agency implied in the term ño̰, an individual can
become an orphan if, upon marriage, they lack parents or other patrilineal ancestors who can be
recognized as ño̰e by their parents-in-law. As among the Murui-Muina, marital alliance with them,
therefore, does not represent real exchange with their lineage (García 2016, 46). Not being valid subjects
of exchange, they used to run the risk, during the slavery period, of becoming its objects.
The presence of a “Dravidian touch” among the Andoque and other People of the Center brings to mind
two points of divergence from the Dravidianate of neighboring groups. Firstly, it creates longer periods
of asymmetry between clans, as a woman taken by a certain clan will only have her departure
compensated through a counter-transfer several generations later. This may explain the past preference
of men—which appears to have practically ceased (see Chapter 3)— for “eliminating” their debt by
naming a daughter after her mother’s clan. Second, unlike in a Dravidian model, Andoque incest rules
prevent spouses from sharing not only parents but also grandparents. This suggests that the latter’s role
in people’s lives may shed light on these incest rules. As noted in previous chapters, a person most
frequently addresses powerful ritual instruments and the nonhuman entities from whom they seek
protection or assistance as “grandfathers” (yo’tapɵ), followed by “grandmothers” (yota) or “uncles”
(yodɨ). Since they are typically considered more knowledgeable than a child’s parents, grandparents are
the primary ones to cure foodstuffs and perform other healing procedures for them. Andoque members
frequently comment that while parents may lack the patience to convey intricate knowledge to their
children—who, in turn, are said to often exhibit impertinence and disobedience towards their parents—
the more affable dynamics of relationship betwen grandchildren and grandparents position the latter as
favored teachers for learning myths and various ritual practices for their defense and well-being.
The protective role of a grandfather can assume an aggressive aspect towards a grandchild’s spouse in
cases of incest. This reaction highlights the predatory implications of sexual relations and the tension
between cognatic kinship and agnatic clan membership. In a sexual relationship that concluded shortly
338

before my fieldwork, Luisa*, a fifteen-years old girl, became pregnant by Jorge*, a twenty-six-years
man. Pregnancy in such an age is usually considered undesirable by the girl’s parents, although it is not
uncommon in the region. This particular situation might have been more readily accepted by Luisa’s
family if it were not for the fact that Jorge was her cousin (FZS):

Jorge

Luisa

Figure 22. The incestuous relationship between Jorge and Luisa

Luisa’s father sought out his nephew in order to kill him, and the parents denounced him for rape at
Puerto Santander’s corregimiento (the girl claimed that the relations were consensual, but, again, she
was a minor). The girl’s father also threatened to kill the future baby, and things only calmed once Jorge
left the region following an assembly of Andoque elders. Jorge thus spent a few months in Bogotá until
after the birth, and did not resume the relationship with Luisa upon his return. When the baby was a few
months old, I spent a month at the house of Luisa and her parents, which is located in the same
settlement as the house of the grandparent of the two cousins (Luisa’s FF and Jorge’s MF), and at some
distance from the house of Jorge’s mother. Onlookers from other families who witnessed Jorge’s
frequent abuse of alcohol and resulting loss of control, attributed it to the grandfather’s sorcery, which
supposedly aimed at causing his grandson to engage in bar fights and consequently die. The grandfather,
on the other hand, told me on more than one occasion that Jorge is dangerous because he practices
“black magic,” which he has supposedly learned from books one finds in Bogotá as well as in boarding
schools, and especially from his non-Andoque paternal uncle who, like his father, lives in La Chorrera
(and whom people claim to be the man’s real father).
When considering clan affiliation (as indicated by the colors in Figure 22), we observe that Luisa
belongs to her paternal grandfather’s clan, while Jorge is a member of his father’s Murui-Muina clan.
This context may suggest that the problem may stem from a lack of reciprocal exchange of women
between the clans. However, more women from Jorge’s clan have married into Luisa’s clan, with only
339

Jorge’s mother moving in the opposite direction. The sexual relationship and subsequent pregnancy
were seemingly perceived as acts of aggression by Jorge against Luisa. Whether any of the sorcery
allegations surrounding this case is real holds little significance for our current purpose. What stands out
is the response to this perceived sexual aggression: the grandfather defended the grandchild from his
own clan and accused the grandson from the other clan of sorcery, leading observers to believe he
intended to bewitch him. Given the perception of sexual and marital bonds as the wife’s capture by the
husband’s clan, such incestuous unions highlight the inherent tension between cognatic affiliation and
agnatic identity, potentially leading grandparents, who are ideally protective figures for all their
grandchildren, to adopt aggressive stances toward non-agnatic kin.
The sorcery allegations accompanying this incest case reveal a conjunction between sorcery and incest
that among the Qom of the Gran Chaco has been interpreted as two manifestations of relational excess
(Tola 2019). In the Andoque case, given the tension between patrilineal identity and cognatic affiliation,
and the tendency to view the world of non-kin as governed by a generalized predatory logic, these two
phenomena represent two modes of resisting consanguinity and adopting an aggressive position towards
kin. While incest involves flouting the rules of consanguinity, sorcery often involves real affines
resisting the familiarization implied in the actualization of marital exchange, and preserving, or even
exaggerating, the inimical stance of the yóʼo or the unrestrained sexual voracity of the saámḭ.
My data records 44 sorcery accusations from the last century (circa 1920s–present), and I will restrict
myself to the 40 accusations that specify the identity of both sorcerer and victim. I classified these cases
into three degrees of severity: category 1 includes interventions in the behaviour or appearance of the
victim in a way that does not represent direct health or fatal risks (for example, causing a boy to remain
short-statured, or the maleficium to cause the victim to age, mentioned in Chapter 9); category 2, with
cases involving the infliction of physical and mental ailments or other misfortunes that seriously disrupt
a person’s functioning and may turn fatal only in the long term, from barrenness to madness and
terminal illnesses; and category 3 which is limited to direct mortal assaults. I further classified the
kinship status of the victim from the sorcerer’s perspective, as consanguine (a person with whom
marriage would be considered incestuous), real affine, affine’s associate—representing victims who are
the lovers of a real affinal victim of the sorcerer or healers who treated affinal victims to save them from
the harms inflicted by the sorcerer—and “other,” a category encompassing individuals who are unrelated
to the sorcerer by blood or marriage.

340

Kinship
Status

Severity
1

Severity
2

Severity
3

Total
Cases
7

Share of
Kinship
Status
17.5%

Only
Severity
2+3
5

Share of
Kinship
Status
20%

Consanguine

2

5

0

Real Affine

6

6

8

20

50%

14

56%

Affine’s
Associate
Other

1

2

0

3

7.5%

2

8%

6

3

1

10

25%

4

16%

Total

15

16

9

40

100%

25

100%

Table 3. Sorcery accusations circa 1920-2019 by severity and the kinship status of the victim from the sorcerer’s point of
view

It is striking that half of all accusations (numbering 20) are raised against real affines, as compared with
17.5% against consanguines and 25% against people found outside of the victim’s immediate kinship
network (7 and 10 cases, respectively). This number reaches 57.5% if we merge it with the three cases
of “affine’s associate.” If we restrict ourselves to the more severe witchcraft and examine only the 25
accusations of categories 2 and 3, attacks by real affines raise to 56% of the cases (14 accusations) or
64%, if “affine associates” are added (2 cases), while attacks by consanguines represent 20% (5 cases)
and those by other people represent only 16% of the cases (4 accusations).
If we indeed “view witchcraft as the antithesis of society, its dark side or alter ego” (Heckenberger 2004,
179), then it is not surprising that in a cognatic society whose members nonetheless put a stark emphasis
on agnatic descent, real affines are perceived as threats and accused of different misfortunes as a way to
express the tension between cognatic and agnatic membership. As in other societies worldwide, sorcery
accusations follow misfortunes, as people attempt to relate an unfortunate situation or event that has
affected themselves or someone else with a prior interaction between the victim and another person, who
is henceforth regarded as the sorcerer (Gluckman 2014, 374). In Evans-Pritchard’s words, misfortunes
are typically traced back to individuals with whom the sufferer “come[s] into closest contact, when this
contact is not softened by sentiments of kinship or is not buffered by distinctions of age, sex, and class”
(1976, 47–48). Andoque members justify the requirement of proximity to affect witchcraft in that a
sorcerer is not likely to risk themselves attacking a person whose gods or guardian spirits they do not
know lest the unknown forces possessed by these protective beings overwhelm them. Conversely,
knowing a person’s clan origin myth and other myths on which they rely ensures a more effective
assault.

341

The statistical correlation between sorcery and affinity resonates with Donald Pollock’s (2004) data
regarding the Kulina, where sorcery is articulated as the opposite of siblingship, and is projected on
villages where potential and sometimes real affines live in order to preserve social harmony and cool
down tensions between households within the village, whose members are conceived as siblings who
would never seek each other’s harm. While the Andoque sometimes accuse co-residents, they typically
project the sources of social tension outside the Andoque clan system, such that only eight cases concern
an Andoque sorcerer and an Andoque victim, five of which being in severity class 1 and merely three in
class 2. The correlation between sorcery and affinity is not surprising if we take into account the
perception of sorcery as a kind of predation and the association between predation and affinity, as well
as the discussions in Chapter 9 of the infliction of harms through sexual seduction. Londoño discusses a
more general Féénemɨna tendency to consider affines as immoral people who are capable of sorcery, and
who are also sometimes viewed as bewitching their in-laws (2012, 139). An analysis of the Andoque
data suggests a more specific interpretation of the association between affinity and sorcery.
Six sorcery attacks in severity classes 2 and 3 against affinal relatives and their associates out of 16
involve motives that are also present in accusations against individuals located outside of their victims’
kinship network, such as envy or revenge over insolence, or perceived harm to kin or property. Two
other assaults are more specific to affinal relations in that they involve killing the son born to the wife of
the sorcerer or his relative and the man for whom she has left the sorcerer or relative. Affecting these
harm reflects the sorcerer’s transition from a real affine of the victim to her enemy, or yóʼo.
The exaggeration of affinity implied in sorcery is more noted in the common logic of the eight other
severe assaults, as these are specifically related to the sorcerers’ position as real affines who, instead of
diminishing their affinal traits when engaging in actual matrimonial exchange, preserve their affinal
nature and insist on the unbounded predatory attitude it implies. Casio* serves as a good example to this
tendency. A non-Andoque man whose sons and daughters married in the 1950s and 1960s Andoque
individuals and who lived at the maloca of his Andoque co-parents-in-law, Casio was accused in no less
than five assaults in varying degrees against these individuals or their consanguine relatives, in addition
to a reported attack against Yiñékɒ because the latter attempted to shield his people from these attacks.
Two of these assaults were allegedly triggered by the refusal by Casio’s Andoque affinal relatives to
provide him with the fish he ordered them to catch for him when they went fishing or after they caught
an abundant yield. Similar to other Amazonian societies, a sorcerer is described as a person who cannot
control his desire and would thus attack those who do not gratify his misplaced requests (da Matta 1982,
342

152; Ewart 2000, 114–15). In Casio’s case, these disproportionate attacks—in one he set illnessinducing dolphins on the refuser and in the other he killed the refuser’s child—are the expressions, at the
culinary level, of his unsatiated voracity, which, at the sexual level, manifested in his reported coveting
of the female blood relatives of his sons and daughters-in-law, including the married mothers of the
latter. Casio is said to have bewitched women who refused his sexual advances or their relatives whom
he considered as obstacles to such gratification. While the matrimonial exchange in which he was
immersed and his orphan status as resident at the maloca of his co-parents-in-law were supposed to
reduce his predatory-affinal tendencies, Casio preserved the aggressiveness and unrestrained sexuality
characterizing potential affines. Casio’s case is also interesting from another perspective. Since he had
been previously rejected by another ethnic settlement due to similar suspicions, and considering that my
interlocutors mentioned his belonging to a powerful lineage, these accusations may also reflect the
atypical post-genocide situation. It seems that during this time, there was doubt about whether some
individuals, lacking surviving fellow clan members and unable to establish their own malocas, could
truly assume the subordinate orphan role within the malocas that took them in. More generally, this
situation attests to the potential power that orphans may hold, or are suspected to hold, despite being
defined as lacking agency.
More recently, another non-Andoque sorcerer is said to have attacked four persons in the past decade
because one of them—his sister-in-law—refused his sexual advances, the other victims being this
woman’s brother and two men whom the sorcerer suspected as her lovers. In this case, the sorcerer
sought sexual access to the woman although, as his brother’s wife, she was supposed to be off-limits to
him. In refusing the familiarizing efforts at play when affinity is actualized, sorcery by in-laws
represents a radicalization of their affinity and entrenchment in the potential affinal position of a yó’o, or
enemy, who cannot be pacified, or saámḭ, whose sexual voracity flouts the norms of accepted alliance.
Consanguineal witchcraft reflects the sorcerer’s similar attempts to distance themselves from kinship
ties with the victim. This is evident in four of the seven cases of sorcery against consanguines, where the
dissociation from consanguinity takes various forms (by contrast, the remaining three accusations can be
classified as pedagogic punishments as they involve an insolent young victim and an elder target of
disrespect). One case concerns the sisters of Lucía*, a non-Andoque woman married to an Andoque man
whose sister, who was married to their brother, left him for another man. The sisters then demanded
Lucía to leave her husband, and, after she refused doing so, they affected a maleficium to prevent her
from giving him any more children, resulting in her own death during childbirth. We may suppose that
343

Lucía’s refusal to comply with the demand of her origin family and what they saw as the family’s best
interest was allegedly perceived by her sisters as her own detachment from that family and preference of
her husband’s interests, for which reason they no longer considered her as their kin. Another case
concerns the Carijona/Yucuna man who was purportedly Agustín’s biological father, and who
bewitched and killed the latter because he preferred to live with his non-real father than with him. Here
again sorcery is practiced against a person who is perceived as already detaching himself from
consanguineal ties with the sorcerer. The third case concerns the non-Andoque wife of an Andoque
member, who was bewitched by her uncle after she refused to have sexual relations with him. The
uncle’s attempt at incestuous contact reflects his shift from regarding his niece as a consanguineal
relative deserving protection to considering her as a potential affine who can be preyed. Finally, Jorge’s
alcohol abuse is attributed to sorcery by his grandfather, reflecting the latter’s aggression towards a
consanguine who is not a clan member, and who had assumed an affinal and aggressive attitude towards
a granddaughter who is a clan member.
Another illuminating case, which I excluded from the table due to its involvement of several aggressors,
concerns Zacarias.* Zacarias, despite being born to a non-Andoque father and an Andoque mother,
strongly self-identifies as Andoque. He co-owned a maloca with his mother and organized ceremonial
dances. Just before my fieldwork began, Zacarias’ wife left him because of his alleged violent behaviour
toward her. His subsequent violent outburst toward his brother in 2018 led to both his brother and his
mother relocating to Leticia. This left Zacarias without a female partner to assist in raising his children
and maintaining the maloca. Discussing these events with me, Zacarias identified several Andoque
elders (among them three consanguineal relatives) as the culprits behind the witchcraft that he believed
caused his deviation from the appropriate path of a maloquero and his subsequent violent outbursts.
When I inquired about their motives, he responded that they disapproved of a man without patrilineal
Andoque descent overseeing an Andoque maloca. In essence, these elders allegedly bewitched Zacarias
to clarify that, when forced to decide between the two coexistent yet competing kinship logics of
agnation and cognation, his maternal connections to several of them make him more of a non-kin than
kin. Therefore, he is seen as belonging to a distinctly separate human center.
As was discussed in Chapter 9, the victims of sorcery are conceived as the food that the sorcerer
provides to the owner-persons of the witchcraft spell, with the latter thereby becoming his pets. In the
framework developed in this dissertation on the continuity between inter-human relations and the
relations between humans and nonhumans, it is thus important to note that the dissociation of human
344

kinship through sorcery is utilized to establish or maintain relations of familiarization (or meta-kinship)
with nonhuman entities. In the next section we delve into the Andoque’s ways to manage the tension
between rivalry and alliance in recent decades.
Agnatic Predation and Competitive Alliances
The coexistence of cognatic and agnatic principles in defining the boundaries of human centers is
interlinked to a tension in the Andoque’s attitudes towards marital exchange, between their aspiration
for mutual exchanges that foster ceremonial ties and deter conflicts between involved parties, and their
pronounced agnatic ideology, which, in some contexts, favors the clan’s benefit over symmetrical
exchange with others. This is reminiscent of tensions among other Northwest Amazonian peoples
between marriage ideals that represent a descent-based and an alliance-based conceptions of society (K.
Århem 1981, 153; Goldman 1963, 142–43). The agnatic ideology reflects, for instance, in the
Andoque’s levirate practice, which is represented by two present marriage unions, the recent of which
was formed shortly after I finished my fieldwork. My interlocutors attribute such marriages between a
man and the widowed wife of his real or classificatory brother to the desire to prevent the loss of the
children of a late clan member to the clan of the widow’s future potential husband and to spare them
“orphanhood,” as they might face maltreatment there.
In the context of a virilocal residence pattern, the agnatic ideology is also apparent in the preference for
sons over daughters. I was often told by both male and female interlocutors that sons are more
trustworthy than daughters because they are likely to stay by their parents and take care of them as they
grow old, whereas daughters marry outside the group and move to their husbands’ settlements. One man
related that for this reason, when he discovered that his wife planned to leave him, he took their two
sons into hiding and allowed her to take only the daughter. “Giving birth to girls is giving wives to your
enemy, but boys will continue your tradition,” his brother remarked. By contrast, sons marry women
who then ideally collaborate with their mothers-in-law. Individuals with only daughters are sometimes
seen as victims of sorcery. For female victims of such sorcery, the suspected sorcerer is often a
frustrated suitor or a relative of an ex-husband, determined to prevent any male progeny contributions to
the new husband’s clan by a woman who refused to benefit his own clan. Two interlocutors mentioned
female infanticide practices by a few women as recently as the 1950s, with one revealing she would
have been killed by her mother (who already had a daughter) if not for her father and maternal

345

grandmother’s intervention. I was also told that control of a prospective baby’s sex could be achieved by
consuming certain herbs or invoking animals associated with masculinity.
This preference for male descendants gained further impetus in the aftermath of the rubber genocide,
when the small group of Andoque survivors sought demographic increase. Yiñékɒ played a central role
in promoting gender disproportion. Several interlocutors reported that during the ceremonial dances he
organized over the years, he would give Andoque participants a manicuera impregnated with a potent
spell aimed at promoting the birth of more sons. These sons would bring their future wives to the group
and produce Andoque offspring, as opposed to daughters who would join other groups upon marriage
and contribute to their demographic growth. Whether this or the other measures to control unborn
babies’ sex were effective or not, the demographic gap between male and female children born from the
1930s onwards is striking:
Author’s Kinship Corpus125
% Male
Female
Births
Births
64%
9

% Female
Births
36%

Guzmán 1971126
Male
Female
Births
Births
19
9

Period of Birth

Male Births

1935-1949

16

1950s

18

60%

12

40%

14

5

1960s

7

41.2%

10

58.8%

24

14

1970s

28

65.1%

15

34.9%

1980s

26

61.9%

16

38.1%

1990s

19

55.88%

15

44.11%

2000s

29

52.72%

26

47.27%

2010s

18

46.15%

21

53.84%

Total127

161

56.5%

124

43.5%

57

28

Table 4. Gender disproportion in Andoque births 1935-2019

The left columns are based on all the births in my kinship corpus, including those where the baby died shortly after birth.
The table only includes individuals defined as Andoque, which, for the most part, refers to those with an Andoque father.
Nevertheless, I also include the children born to Andoque women who were raised either by these women or their family
members without the father’s involvement, as these children are considered part of their mother’s clan. Additionally, the data
includes the children born to Raquel Andoque from unions with Nonuya and Murui men. These children either received or
chose Andoque names and self-identify as such.
126
These data were calculated by summing up Guzmán’s data concerning the number of male and female Andoque members
of different age groups, and assuming 1970 or 1971 as the year of data collection in which he also divided members into age
groups (1971, appendix 5). Guzmán’s number for the age group “0–5 years old” appears here as part of the figure for the
1960s, although it might have included people born in 1970 or 1971, who should appear in the category “1970s.” This may
be partly responsible for the significant gap between my and Guzmán’s data for the 1960s. Other discrepancies between our
figures might arise from the uncertainty of elder individuals regarding their year of birth. This necessitated my judgment in
determining their birth decade, potentially leading to some errors. It is also possible that my informants omitted children who
did not survive their first years of childhood, yet are included in Guzmán’s figures.
127
The total for Guzmán’s figures concerns the year 1971.
125

346

My kinship corpus, based on oral reports from 2018–2023, may be suspected as reflecting a gender bias,
where people are more likely to remember and report the birth of male children who died in their early
years than that of females, who might be forgotten. However, the gender gap in births between 1935 and
1970 is even more pronounced in Guzmán’s figures, where temporal proximity likely reduced such bias.
According to his data, in 1971, 65% of Andoque members aged 0–35 were male, while only 35% were
female. In comparison, my corpus indicates a smaller yet still significant disparity for 1935-2019: 56.5%
male vs. 43.5% female. This difference becomes even more pronounced when considering only the
children born between 1935 and 1999, whose parents were alive in the 1960s and 1970s to receive
Yiñékɒ’s manicuera: 114 boys (59.68%), compared with 77 girls (40.31%).
Thus, the rehabilitation of predatory capacity, deemed crucial for the Andoque’s cultural and
demographic post-genocide recuperation process (see Chapter 4), was also intended to materialize in
actual asymmetrical matrimonial exchange with non-Andoque groups. However, although the Andoque
population has shown a remarkable demographic increase since its nadir in the 1930s, we can conclude
that the gender disproportion has not translated into an overall asymmetrical exchange of women, where
the Andoque receive significantly more women from other groups than they give, but has instead
resulted in a balance of in-marrying and out-marrying women. This is evident when considering the
marriages contracted by the members born between 1930 and 1999, while the gender disproportion was
still high (above 10%), and who had reached the age of marriageability, or married, or died without
having married, by the time I lived on their territory.
Primary Spouse
Andoque Member
Other Indigenous Person
Non-Indigenous Person
Unknown
Known to be Unmarried

Men
17
48
4
5
40

Women
17
29
17
10
6

Table 5. Marriages contracted by Andoque members born between 1930 and 1999128

The “unknown” spouses refer to non-Andoque or non-Indigenous individuals married to Andoque
members who are known to be alive but reside outside the territory for an extended period, resulting in
either lost contact with my interlocutors or unreliable information provided to me about them. The
category of unknown spouses does not include Andoque individuals, a situation that would undoubtedly

Due to the multiple unions of many Andoque members, this table only includes their primary spouses, defined as the
spouse with whom one has had the most children and with whom one has cohabited for a longer time.
128

347

reflect in my data. Assuming all members with unknown spouses are (or were) indeed married, it
emerges that the number of Andoque members marrying non-Andoque spouses is nearly identical—57
for men and 56 for women. It thus seems that the number of women marrying into the Andoque people
is practically identical to the number of women marrying non-Andoque men and predominantly giving
birth to children who are not Andoque and/or live outside the Andoque territory. Comparing this with
the numbers of 114 men and 77 women upon which the table is based, it is clear that the significant gap
between the numbers of male and female births did not result in a desired equivalent gap between
women marrying into and out of the Andoque people. This disparity manifests in the large number of
men known to be unmarried—a striking 40, compared to just 6 women. While some of these unmarried
men may wed in the future, given the broader age flexibility for male marriages, many men in my
dataset have already reached their 40s and 50s or have passed away unmarried. Therefore, while the
Andoque succeeded in creating a gender disproportion, their efforts to establish asymmetrical exchanges
with neighboring groups did not fully succeed, as they could not secure enough non-Andoque women to
marry the surplus of men. Yet, the gender imbalance enabled them to offset the number of women
marrying out by the number marrying in. Furthermore, focusing on individuals born between the 1930s
and 1980s—to sidestep the issue of older marriage age for men—we observe a higher number of male
members marrying non-Andoque women than female members marrying non-Andoque men:
Primary Spouse
Andoque Member
Other Indigenous Person
Non-Indigenous Person
Unknown
Known to be Unmarried

Men
17
43
3
3
29

Women
17
17
11
12
5

Table 6. Marriages contracted by Andoque members born between 1930 and 1989

Again, if we include marriages with unknown spouses within those to non-Andoque ones, the count is
49 Andoque men marrying non-Andoque women versus 40 Andoque women marrying non-Andoque
men. This reflects a slightly asymmetrical surplus of women in exchanges with neighboring groups,
including Whites.
Guzmán’s observations from five decades ago led him to assert that “the main criterion for admitting a
person or a group of people into the community is their contribution to the group’s numerical growth
and augmentation of power. For this reason, what interests the Andoque and their captain most is the
integration of women” (1971, 73; my translation). To this, we can add the preference for orphans, who
do not pose the risk of a separate competitive center and would not require bride service from the

348

groom. In the second half of the 1950s, a Nonuya man named Julio married to a Féénemɨna woman
sought refuge in Andoque territory after fleeing conflicts in a Féénemɨna community. Julio had two sons
and three daughters, the eldest of whom he offered to Yiñékɒ as wife for his elder son Fisi from the
outset. Although Yiñékɒ accepted him to the group, he declined the matrimonial plan because of his
son’s relatively young age. The woman then married one of the sons of Joselito of the Eagle Clan, so
Julio moved into Joselito’s house. Over time, Julio became affiliated with To̰fi’s maloca. His eldest son
Elias married To̰fi’s daughter Raquel, and Julio relocated to that maloca, where his son became one of
his father-in-law’s workers. During this period, Julio’s youngest daughter formed a couple with To̰fi’s
son before she married an Andoque man of the Atta Ant Clan, and another brother of hers married an
Andoque woman from the Spix’s Guan Clan, who was the daughter of one of To̰fi’s workers.
Interestingly, although the initial marriage between Elias and Raquel dissolved after To̰fi’s death around
1970, the influences of To̰fi’s heritage and residence among the Andoque were strong enough for two of
the three children born of that union to continue self-identifying as Andoque and members of the Deer
Clan, with one of them, also called Elias, eventually constructing his own Andoque maloca with his
mother. After this marriage dissolved, Julio maintained an orphan-like position, moving to the house
where his youngest daughter lived with her husband from the Atta Ant Clan. Only his sons later
constructed malocas, after separating from the Andoque group and moving downriver.
In 1959, when incorporating the Murui group found during rubber gathering (see Chapter 4), the
interests of rubber boss Alberto Zumaeta in enhancing economic production aligned with Yiñékɒ’s aim
to boost the Andoque’s social reproductive capacity. Initially, the Murui group consisted of between
eight and ten women and only three men, with a notable rate of incestuous unions, which my
interlocutors believe the women were eager to end. While the Murui men stayed in the forest to gather
rubber for Zumaeta, Yiñékɒ brought the women back with him and introduced them to the Andoque
men. As a result, four Murui women became part of Andoque households, including those of To̰fi and
Yiñékɒ; however, only two of these unions persisted, and they were with other Andoque men. The
perceived inferiority of the Murui group members in the eyes of the Andoque intensified after the
former’s unsuccessful attempt to integrate into an upriver Murui community and their return to the
Andoque territory, an inferiority that reflected in reports of sexual aggressions against the group’s
women. From this group, only one Murui man married an Andoque woman—the same Raquel.
Tellingly, Raquel named their sole male child after her father To̰fi, and one of their daughters also selfidentifies as Andoque, and chose as an adult a name from her Andoque grandmother’s clan repository.
349

While the asymmetrical exchange of women was viewed as essential for increasing the Andoque
population, more balanced marital exchange strategies were established between the two Andoque
maloqueros, Yiñékɒ and To̰fi, and non-Andoque captains with whom they aimed to form alliances or
prevent hostilities. The Andoque’s “women exchange” does not necessarily imply a direct swap where
two women move from one family to another at a specific point in time, as is idealized by other groups
like the Macuna (K. Århem 1981, 156–57). A suitor might hint at the availability of a sister or cousin
who could potentially marry the prospective wife’s brothers when expressing his marriage intentions to
a potential father-in-law, with symmetry materializing several months or years after the initial marriage.
In the 1950s, To̰fi gave his eldest daughter—the first girl to be born after the return to the ancestral
territory—to a Féénemɨna man whose male relative had been killed years earlier by Yinñéfɵkn, To̰fi’s
collaborator in dances, and whose female relative was already married to To̰fi’s worker, Duñékɒ. This
betrothal was not merely to rectify the imbalance caused by two Féénemɨna individuals being taken
from their community due to Andoque actions. It was also part of a broader effort to foster dialogue
between the Andoque and the captain of that Féénemɨna group. This initiative eventually resulted in
further exchanges and reciprocal arrangements involving women from both groups. The Féénemɨna
groom undertook an extended period of bride service at To̰fi’s maloca and was only allowed to move to
his parental home with his wife after the birth and ceremonial naming of their two sons by To̰fi.
In the 1960s, Yiñékɒ consented to the betrothal of his daughter, Irene, to a Murui-Muina man named
Calixto against her will. Calixto, who was away from his family and engaged in rubber gathering
alongside the Andoque, had previously saved the life of Yiñékɒ’s younger son. While residing at
Yiñékɒ’s maloca, Calixto earned the captain’s respect with his diligence and dedication. During a visit
to Calixto’s family, Irene and Calixto brought his sister Edelmira back with them. Calixto proposed
Edelmira as a bride for Mario, To̰fi’s son, deepening the marital ties between the families. However,
after briefly living with Mario, Edelmira fell for one of Joselito’s sons and chose to marry him instead.
Following the death of Calixto’s father, his mother and another sister, Regina, relocated to Joselito’s
settlement. Calixto later arranged, in collaboration with Yiñékɒ and his son Rodolfo, for Rodolfo to
marry Regina, which eventually took place.
In these instances, the maloqueros consented to the marriages of their daughters as restitution to nonAndoque men. This strategy aimed at establishing balanced alliances with these men and their respective
groups. The goal was to avoid potential conflicts arising from past misdeeds by Andoque individuals or

350

as a form of gratitude for lives saved by these non-Andoque men. In such scenarios and others, the
daughters of both maloquero and non-maloquero men were critical resources in forming alliances or
circumventing hostilities. However, as K. Århem highlighted for the Macuna, the ideals of marital
exchange can mistakenly suggest that women are sweepingly coerced into these unions, but marital
arrangements that utterly overlook a woman’s desires or interests might lead to the breakdown of these
arrangements, potentially escalating tensions between groups (1981, 157–58). Despite their aim to
solidify ceremonial and marital ties with other communities and increase their ranks by bringing in nonAndoque sons-in-law, To̰fi and Yiñékɒ remained deeply concerned about their daughters’ well-being
post-marriage and respected their children’s decisions. After a few years, To̰fi separated his daughter
from her Féénemɨna husband upon discovering she was being mistreated. In a similar vein, Yiñékɒ’s
Murui-Muina son-in-law departed from his maloca after Irene eloped with Tañe of the Sun Clan. This
relationship was initially frowned upon by both Irene and Tañe’s parents due to its perceived incestuous
nature but was eventually accepted.
The capacity to mobilize children for marriage, especially daughters, was a crucial component of a
maloquero’s power. This recalls the “political economy of control” (in Viveiros de Castro’s [1996]
terms), which Rivière and Turner found in the uxorilocal societies of Guyana and Central Brazil (Rivière
1983; T. Turner 2003), where elder men’s control over marriages and resultant relocations granted them
power over the labor and reproductive capabilities of the younger population. Indeed, as noted earlier,
enforcing temporary uxorilocality enhances a maloquero’s labor force and prestige. However, within the
Andoque’s landscape of patrilineal ideology, virilocal residence, and the perception of a generalized
predation among human and nonhuman groups, this matrimonial authority should be viewed primarily
as enhancing the maloquero’s capacity to navigate the delicate exchanges with other human centers.
Thus, while orphans, as non-consanguine maloca members, were transacted in heterosubstitutive trade
for non-Indigenous goods, the maloquero’s closer kin, particularly his children, were transacted in such
homosubstitutive exchanges between clans. In the past, parents’ matrimonial authority depended on the
relative distance between clan settlements. Occasional maloca visits and, more importantly, ceremonial
dances became primary occasions for young men and women to interact, though typically under the
watchful eyes of their elder kin. However, this dynamic has undergone notable shifts since the 1970s
and 1980s due to a range of factors, such as the increasing spatial mobility in the region (and from it to
other parts of Colombia) and the establishment of the boarding school in Araracuara. At this school,
teenage boys and girls socialize with members of their age group and often engage in romantic and
351

sexual affairs with them, without the mediation of their elder relatives. However, parents retain subtle
means of influence that sidestep overt coercion. As one interlocutor explained, a father might evoke
Tatoañei, the mythical figure whose sons captivated Shadow Egg’s daughters, to kindle his son’s interest
in a particular woman. Thus, in a manner akin to the love perfumes described in the previous chapter,
the capabilities of nonhuman entities can be harnessed to navigate marital exchanges with other human
centers.
In the accounts of my interlocutors, parental marriage arrangements from the 1970s onwards seem
relatively loose and flexible. Parents can indicate to their son that the parents of a particular woman are
likely to approve of a potential marriage between their daughter and him. Raquel shared an anecdote
with me: after her eldest daughter, Miryan, was born in 1964, Yiñékɒ’s wife, Pa̰’fó, convinced her to, in
due course, betroth her daughter to Pa̰’fó’s youngest son, Ignacio. Raquel emphasizes that she never
proactively encouraged this union. However, Ignacio’s mother informed him that Raquel had already
consented, leading to a situation where Miryan later approached her mother to reveal that Ignacio was
courting her and she was keen to marry him. Raquel, naturally, gave her blessing.
In a separate instance from the 1990s, Rodolfo’s daughter from the Eagle Clan fell for Celestino, a
Murui-Muina man from La Chorrera working in the Araracuara sector. The two wed, and she relocated
to Celestino’s family. During a visit, Rodolfo mentioned to Celestino’s family the challenges his sons
faced in finding wives due to the prevalence of close family ties among the Andoque. The hosts, seeing
an opportunity, suggested intermarriages with women from their family. Subsequently, one of Rodolfo’s
sons journeyed to La Chorrera, returning soon after with Celestino’s niece. His cousin followed suit,
staying for around three months and bringing back the woman’s sister. Later, Rodolfo’s youngest son
also married in La Chorrera, taking Celestino’s cousin as a wife. The growing disparity in the exchange,
where three women joined Rodolfo’s family and only one joined Celestino’s, seemed to demand
extended bride service durations. This is evident as Rodolfo’s youngest son lived with his wife’s family
for over a year before bringing her home.
In these cases, the parental arrangement did not imply forcing the couple, and especially the women,
into marriage. Instead, it was more about addressing any concerns of overt or covert violence that might
deter a young man and his kin from seeking a wife elsewhere. Contrasting this strategy is bride capture
or “stealing” (fɨ). The three cases of bride capture in my data set, occurring between the late 1960s and
2021, did not involve the kidnapping of an unwilling woman. Rather, it was about the young couple

352

eloping without consulting the bride’s father. This elopement ideally lasts long enough to evidence an
emerging pregnancy, making opposition to the union from their families less likely. Interestingly, all
three instances involved two Andoque individuals. This might be due to the risk of overt or covert
violence from the bride’s family, which could be viewed as too significant when involving nonAndoque people. However, it might be deemed improbable or manageable when involving Andoque
members with whom the groom’s family has stronger ties. Thus, while suitors might aim for
matrimonial exchange based on past reciprocity or the promise of future ones when dealing with more
distant affinal centers, they might risk defying this norm when seeking union with a member of a closer
family, which might not be perceived as threatening to these particular suitors.
When discussing a period where parental marital arrangements are less frequent and systematic and
young individuals have greater freedom to seek spouses themselves without prioritizing their clan
interests, it is important to examine not only the power dynamics that marriage strategies aim to achieve
but also those that actual marriage unions produce. In the Andoque case, the two most notable
phenomena are the marginalization of the Eagle Clan, and especially the Harpy Eagle lineage, and the
competitive alliance between this lineage and the Sun Clan, that I will discuss in this order.
As observed in Chapter 4, Yiñékɒ’s leadership after the rubber genocide was intricately connected to his
marriage with Pa̰’fó, which transformed many individuals into his real affines and workers. Due to
Pa̰’fó’s central position in the kinship network among the small group of survivors and Yiñékɒ’s
(distant) blood ties with To̰fi, his descendants of the Harpy Eagle lineage found themselves in a
consanguineal centrality that precluded matrimony with numerous other Andoque individuals, as these
would be deemed incestuous. In the first generation born after their return to the territory, most of
Yiñékɒ’s efforts to seek outward marital alliances were thwarted, and four of his five children wedded
the few Andoque individuals to whom they were not related by blood, or with whom blood relations
could be suitably minimized. However, the pool of potential Andoque spouses for the children of these
unions, as well as for his sons’ unions with non-Andoque women, was notably limited. This pattern was
also evident in the broader Eagle Clan. Despite the clan’s significantly larger population over the
generations—105 members in 2018 compared to the next largest, the Atta Ant Clan, with 54 members
(Table 1, Chapter 3)—fewer men from the Eagle Clan than from the Sun Clan chose Andoque women as
their primary spouses. In contrast, the Eagle Clan predominantly provided women as spouses for other
Andoque clans.

353

Clan

Men

Women

Eagle

5

8

Deer

1

3

Sun

6

2

Ant

4

0

Beetle

1

3

Spix’s Guan

0

1

Total

17

17

Table 7. Members of Andoque clans with primary marriages with other Andoque individuals

The comparison with the Sun Clan is salient. This clan consists of the descendants of Pedro, a Miraña
man who was a marginal, orphan member of Yiñékɒ’s group. Their non-Andoque descent freed the
members of this clan from consanguineal ties to most Andoque members in the first generation born
after the return to the territory, resulting in their rise to a central position in the Andoque kinship
network and maintaining of this position ever since. Three of Pedro’s four sons married Andoque wives,
and this clan’s ability to continue marrying Andoque individuals persisted in the following generation,
as five of their children have had Andoque spouses. The members of the Deer, Beetle, and Atta Ant
Clans also had larger pools of potential Andoque spouses to choose from.
The centrality of the Sun Clan, as well as the prominent position of the Atta Ant Clan, becomes more
evident when we examine the number of children born from ethnically endogamous unions (AndoqueAndoque) as a proportion of the total number of children born in each clan, from both endogamous and
exogamous unions (Andoque-non-Andoque):

354

Period
1930–1959

1960–1989

1990–2019

All Periods

Born to
Andoque
Women
All Women
% Andoque
Mothers
Andoque
Women
All Women
% Andoque
Mothers
Andoque
Women
All Women
% Andoque
Mothers
Andoque
Women
All Women
% Andoque
Mothers

Eagle
21

Atta Ant
8

Beetle
4

Sun
4

Deer
2

28
75%

9
88.88%

8
50%

4
100%

2
100%

15

3

2

11

9

49
30.61%

18
16.66%

6
33.33%

14
78.57%

9
100%

10

18

0

15

2

41
24.39%

31
58.06%

12
0

30
50%

13
15.38%

46

27

6

30

13

118
38.98%

58
46.55%

26
23.07%

48
62.5%

24
54.16%

Table 8. Proportion of children born to two Andoque parents in the five main Andoque clans (1930–2019)129

As the table shows, the proportion of children from the Eagle Clan who also have Andoque mothers has
sharply declined over the years, accounting for only 24.39% among those born in the last examined
period (1990–2019). By contrast, during that same period, the Atta Ant and Sun Clans led in the
percentage of children born to Andoque mothers, registering 58.06% and 50%, respectively. Over the
broader timeframe (1930–2019), these two clans consistently demonstrated high rates of endogamous
parenthood—46.55% for the Atta Ant Clan and 62.5% for the Sun Clan.130
Regarding power dynamics, what are the benefits of endogamous unions? As discussed earlier,
endogamous unions are perceived as safer for the parties involved, given that the majority of individuals
accused of sorcery are non-Andoque, especially those who are real affines. As was also mentioned,
while marriage relations can create competition between brothers-in-law, they can also encourage
Children born to Andoque women from non-Andoque men are recorded only if considered members of the mother’s clan.
In cases where a child is raised solely by their mother or her family, without support or name bestowal from the father, the
child is considered part of the mother’s clan. Given that three of Raquel’s daughters were named after their father’s Murui
Tree Clan but were raised among the Andoque and taught ceremonial skills by their mother—and consequently identify as
both Andoque and Murui—they are represented in this table as “Andoque mothers.” On the other hand, they are not
considered members of the Deer Clan. Therefore, while their own births are not recorded in the table, the births resulting
from their unions with Andoque men are included.
130
the Deer Clan, which has an overall high rate of endogamous parenthood, had a significantly low rate since 1990. It
should be noted that three of its members born to an Andoque mother between 1960–1989 had non-Indigenous fathers. These
are Raquel’s two sons and one daughter who received Andoque names from her and do not represent endogamous
parenthood. If we omit them from the account, we remain with an overall proportion of 47.61% of children born to Andoque
mothers among this clan.
129

355

mutual visits and cooperation between in-laws. An endogamous union typically implies closer
geographical proximity between a man and his in-laws, increasing the likelihood of mutual visits
between allied families and more frequent shared mambeadero sessions. During my fieldwork, I
observed that members of the Eagle Clan primarily visited the mambeaderos of their blood relatives and
mostly received visits from younger members of the Deer Clan. In contrast, members of the Sun Clan
engaged in more frequent visits both to and from mambeaderos of the Atta Ant and Beetle Clans.
However, endogamous unions and parenthood have further implications in today’s context, as members
of distinct Andoque-speaking clans own land collectively, receive resources, manage a community
school, and negotiate with state agencies, as well as other companies and organizations, as Andoque,
rather than as separate clans. The marital relations between the Sun, Atta Ant, and Beetle Clans—and
the more frequent visits their members exchange—correlate with their numerous instances of solidarity
in community assemblies concerning reserve leadership and management. During my fieldwork,
members of the three clans often formed a critical opposition to the reserve governor Hernando, Fisi’s
son from the Eagle Clan, who garnered support primarily from his own family and the Deer Clan.
Before my fieldwork, members of the Atta Ant Clan supported the candidacy of a member of the Sun
Clan for reserve governorship. After my fieldwork, they received backing from that clan for the
governorship candidacy of one of their own. In addition to the large number of children in the Atta Ant
Clan and the proximity in which families of that clan live, the alliance between the Atta Ant and the Sun
Clan underpinned their campaign to relocate the community school from Fisi’s settlement to the Atta
Ant settlement in 2002, citing allegations of the school’s mismanagement. In its current location, the
school predominantly serves the children of the Atta Ant Clan and provides income to members of this
clan who either work at the school or sell it food products.
Whereas marital exchange created collaborative affinal relations between the Sun Clan and the Atta Ant
and Beetle Clans, it created competitive dynamics between this clan and the Eagle Clan, following a
union that became pivotal for the Andoque people—namely, the matrimony between Tañe and Irene. In
the latter half of the 1960s, Irene left her Murui-Muina husband for Tañe, and shortly afterward gave
birth to Yiñékɒ’s first male grandson. However, Irene joined Tañe in the rubber camp, and when the
baby was a few months old, he died there. His death was first attributed to sorcery by the abandoned
husband and later to sorcery by another affinal relative, together with a lack of observation of dietary
rules by the parents, and Yiñékɒ became angry with Tañe for not protecting his grandson. Irene
describes the period following the baby’s death as a bleak period for Yiñékɒ when he did not have a
356

maloca and was full of negative, vengeful thoughts, which resulted in the insufficient spiritual protection
of four other Andoque babies who also died. Therefore, Yiñékɒ rejoiced when Irene gave birth to
another son in 1970, and this time preferred to monitor his son-in-law up close. He summoned Tañe for
a few intensive weeks of nocturnal mambeadero sessions, teaching him different healing procedures and
imparting essential knowledge for protecting his family. Tañe continued to frequent Yiñékɒ’s
mambeaderos over the years, listening to different myths and instructions from him. Irene remembers
how her father told her, when his grandson Wilson was three months old: “Now that I have a grandson,
I’ll build a maloca, I will give him a name, we will dance. I am thinking ‘good’ now (páa bɵ fg̋ ñḛkn
ḭtúañei).” Although Wilson was not Yiñékɒ’s only grandson by then—Irene’s younger brother had
become a father to a son shortly afterwards—he was the first one to be given a name by Yiñékɒ in a
ceremonial dance. Specifically, Yiñékɒ named Wilson (Hɵ́ñoi, “[the Moon’s Face is] Beautiful”) during
the red ritual specialization dance River Turtle-Carrier Band, associated with aggressiveness and
leadership (see the next chapter).
My interlocutors unanimously agree that Yiñékɒ destined Wilson to be a captain. Most of them, from all
clans, also assert that he saw Wilson as the future cacique, or captain above clan level, just like himself.
Wilson told me that he possesses superior capacity to engage in dialogues with the nonhuman entities of
the territory and provide them with more effective ḭtaséa (offerings) than any other Andoque member
today, because as a child, he managed to learn from Yiñékɒ for a few years before the latter’s death.
While several other interlocutors claimed that Wilson was too young back then to go through an
apprenticeship process, they concurred that Yiñékɒ “blessed” certain foodstuffs for his grandson, so that
the latter would carry Yiñékɒ’s knowledge within his stomach.
Tañe played an intermediary role in the transmission of knowledge between grandfather and grandson,
as he was instructed by Yiñékɒ to pass on the same teachings provided to him to his son as he grew up.
However, according to the account of the member of another family, Yiñékɒ had entrusted Tañe with
only the essentials required to care for his grandson, allowing the young boy to develop his own mature
thinking independently. Although Tañe did not belong to a maloquero family and had received a name
associated with the low-prestige Armadillo or Fern Dance during his childhood, which is linked with
white specialization, he grew to appreciate the prestige linked with the red specialization that Yiñékɒ
intended for his son. Tañe explained to me that when Yiñékɒ bestowed a name upon Wilson during a
“red” dance, he was also extending the red specialization to him. Tañe stated, “I wasn’t born to a red
career, but to Armadillo [Dance], whose origin is the fern (ti’ñḛdɨ, Pteridaceae sp.), and fern is also the
357

origin of the Tu’sí (the Multiplying Tree Dance) [of the red specialization]. With that origin, Yiñeko
switched my color from white to red.” Tañe was malleable, much like his father Pedro, who embraced
Andoque identity despite his Miraña upbringing. This set him apart from his brother-in-law, Yiñékɒ’s
younger son. Although this younger son fathered Yiñékɒ’s first surviving grandson, his own son was not
chosen for captaincy by the grandfather. This decision was attributed to his parents’ reputed bad temper,
particularly the father’s inclination to display defiance and contradict Yiñékɒ. Despite Yiñékɒ naming
the firstborn son of his elder son Fisi in the River Turtle-Carrier Band Dance in the following years,
none of my interlocutors attributed a similar process of knowledge and power transmission as involved
Wilson to that or any other grandson.
Irene recounted to me how, after she and Tañe moved to their current settlement, Yiñékɒ came “to fix
(hɵ́íkaí) the place where my daughter is going to live.” Tañe further described the collaborative effort
between his father and Yiñékɒ to drive away animals from the site that had been sent by a sorcerer to
harm his family. More generally, Tañe said that Yiñékɒ had explained to him that his clan, the Sun Clan,
is descended from the Piercers (Yɒ’nnkn), who lived along the Caquetá River. In contrast, Yiñékɒ’s
Eagle Clan and the other surviving clans trace their origins to the Shadows (Ká’hɵi síɵ́hɵ), who resided
further inland. As a result, according to Tañe, the majority of Andoque people now resides within the
ancestral territory of the Sun Clan, including the children of Yiñékɒ, who acknowledged not living
within his clan’s designated territory.
In 1986, three years after Yiñékɒ’s death, Tañe became the first member of his generation to construct a
maloca, a year ahead of his brother-in-law Fisi, Yiñékɒ’s son, who was Tañe’s main competitor for
leadership among Yiñékɒ’s mentees. Unlike his younger brother Rodolfo, who received his name in the
Fausíya “white” dance, Fisi did not have a ceremonial name bestowed upon him by his father. However,
according to Fisi, “I told my father, ‘I have a long tongue, I can tell many stories,’ and he listened to me
telling one story after another. He said: ‘You can [you have proved your capacities]!’ He changed my
name to Fi’siɒi (“Rock’s Edge”) when I was fourteen years old, almost fifteen. My mother said that
giving me such a name of a sorcerer [brujo, i.e., a powerful, wise man] was too heavy, that it was
dangerous, but he told her: ‘yes, he can [manage the powers contained in this name].’” Fisi received
teachings from his father on numerous occasions, especially during five years of intensive mambeadero
sessions following his separation from his first wife in the latter half of the 1960s. When Jon Landaburu
began working with the Andoque in 1969, Fisi became his assistant, collaborating to transcribe and
interpret myths narrated by Yiñékɒ and other elders. This experience, along with Fisi’s extensive
358

training under his father, positioned him in the eyes of most Andoque members as the ultimate authority
on mythology and other traditions. This also paved the way for a series of collaborations with
anthropologists and researchers, as well as invitations to participate in conferences worldwide.
While Fisi represented Andoque traditions in such instances, Tañe and other members of the Sun Clan
served as intermediaries between the Andoque and the non-Indigenous world. This trend began with
Margarita, Tañe’s maternal grandmother, who married a non-Indigenous Venezuelan man and raised her
family at the mouth of Macaw River, distanced from Yiñékɒ’s maloca. This location earned her family
the moniker “the River Mouth People” (ɵkɒ́ ño̰e), a designation linked with Whites. Before Margarita’s
daughter Ines married Pedro, she lived with both Miguel Zumaeta, from whom she bore Amazonas, and
another mestizo man, from whom she bore Alisia. While Amazonas solidified the blood connection
between the Sun Clan and the Zumaeta family, Alisia played a pivotal affinal role by marrying Alberto
Zumaeta, Amazonas’ half-brother (who is not biologically related to her). Delio and Tañe, Pedro’s sons,
became integral collaborators alongside their brother-in-law Alberto and their nephew Jairo in various
economic ventures that ensued after rubber extraction, such as animal pelt hunting and fishing. In one of
these ventures during the 1980s, Andoque members would submit raw materials at Tañe’s maloca and
collect their pay there. This pay arrived in the form of goods purchased in Bogotá, harking back to the
classic role of the maloca as the center of economic exchange with Whites and as a repository for goods
obtained through such exchanges. This legacy persisted until shortly before my fieldwork, when
Alberto’s son Carlos allied with Delio and Tañe’s sons, Orlando and Levy, to legalize gold mining in the
Andoque territory (Audren 2017). Interestingly, the Sun Clan’s business orientation, which implies a
more extractive and utilitarian attitude toward nonhuman entities, aligns with their descent from the
Piercers. As suggested in Chapter 8, the Piercers represent greater human determination vis-à-vis
nonhumans and domination over them.
Today, Fisi and the members of his household discredit Tañe’s first maloca on account of these business
relations, attributing its construction not to his commitment to the ceremonial tradition but as part of a
specific economic initiative that necessitated traditional settings. They also explain Fisi’s personal delay
in building a maloca after Yiñékɒ’s death by his intention to wait in the wings for his brother Rodolfo to
construct one. This choice allegedly reflects Fisi’s respect for Yiñékɒ’s action of conferring a
ceremonial name to Rodolfo rather than to himself. This is because when two brothers reside in the same
settlement, as was the case for Fisi and Rodolfo, they cannot each lead separate malocas, but are
expected to collaborate and support the one who undertakes such a project. Fisi finally constructed his
359

own maloca when he realized that Rodolfo would not initiate the process, spurred by the requests of
several Andoque women.
Tañe and Fisi became ceremonial allies and competitors, exchanging invitations to most of the dances
they organized, as expected of brothers-in-law. However, their mutual criticism, at times, appear to
undermine the vital competitive dynamics between maloqueros. They each hold different versions of
several myths and ritual traditions learned from Yiñékɒ, such as the myth of the origin of Multiplying
Tree (for Fisi’s version see M11 in Appendix 1, vs. Tañe’s versions in de la Hoz Melo 2005, 38–42) or
the story of Tofidei’s war against the anacondas of the River Mouth (Fisi’s version: M23 in Appendix 1;
Tañe’s version: de la Hoz Melo 2005, 38–42). In the case of the myth regarding the war between the
Sun and the Moon (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 45–52), which serves as the origin story of Tañe’s clan,
the two narrators allocate the actions of the protagonists differently. Fisi emphasizes the violent and
malicious nature of Sun, whereas Tañe underscores his role as the benefactor providing light and life to
humanity. As discussed in Chapter 4, they each also hold different versions in relation to the extent of
Mnkoena’s guidance and the corresponding significance of lineage membership in Yiñékɒ’s
apprenticeship process. Though both maloqueros claim to be true adherents of Yiñékɒ’s teachings, Tañe
and his family members point out Fisi’s invention of concepts and practices that Yiñékɒ never imparted.
On the other hand, Fisi and his household members raise questions about the adequacy of Tañe’s
knowledge in myth and ritual.
Fisi and his family members present Tañe as an inferior rival. They recount how Tañe invited Fisi to his
first Multiplying Tree Dance, but when it came to replicating the songs sung by Fisi during that dance at
Fisi’s reciprocated event where Tañe was the guest, Tañe stumbled. Despite continuing to invite Tañe as
a guest, Fisi downplayed his singing abilities and relied on Alfonso from the Atta Ant Clan for that role.
Of greater significance, Fisi invited Tañe for a Fausíya Dance in 1997, but the latter did not respond
with a reciprocal invitation for the same dance, because he never organized one. According to Fisi, this
has resulted in a debt owed by both maloqueros to the dance’s owner-person, a situation that puts them
at risk. Consequently, Fisi explained, he had stopped inviting Tañe to dances because the latter “ya no
pudo”—he proved that he could not keep up with his rival’s challenges. Fisi’s family members
emphasize that this has left Fisi without a ceremonial partner, leading to a decline in the dances he has
organized since. Although Fisi invited Alfonso to sing at several dances, he was aware that the latter,
lacking a maloca, could not extend reciprocal dance invitations to him. Although Fisi was invited

360

several times by Mario, he reciprocated by inviting Mario back only infrequently, as the latter had
previously collaborated with him and his father in dance organization.
While Fisi and his family members criticize Tañe for lacking the necessary competence in myth and
ritual, which is essential for a maloquero, Tañe counters by highlighting their deficiency in another
crucial aspect—organizing people for collaborative work efforts and efficiently allocating resources, a
skill for which many individuals commend him. Moreover, according to Tañe and his family, the
cessation of reciprocal invitations between them and Fisi stemmed from a different rationale. The
construction of their second maloca in 2000 was intended to groom Wilson for the role of maloquero.
Wilson embraced greater ceremonial responsibilities, arranging dances to which he invited his own
brother-in-law, Elias, who also had his own maloca by then and reciprocated the dance invitations. In
essence, what Fisi and his family perceive as a manifestation of Tañe’s inadequate ceremonial prowess,
Tañe interprets as adherence to Yiñékɒ’s intentions and the seamless transfer of ceremonial duties to the
next generation—a transfer that, in his view, is absent in Fisi’s household, signaling Fisi’s shortcomings
in preparing his sons for the role of maloquero.
In conclusion, the competitive alliance between Fisi and Tañe is the outcome of the unforeseen union
between Irene and Tañe, and of Yiñékɒ’s bending agnatic logic. In this exceptional scenario, the
maternal grandfather bestowed knowledge and power that he may not have shared with his
grandchildren from his own clan, upon a grandson who belongs to another clan—a clan that the
grandfather had nevertheless founded and shaped himself. Whether we adopt Fisi’s perspective on
Tañe’s insufficient competence or Tañe’s interpretation of his role as an intermediary link between
Yiñékɒ and the predestined captain, Wilson, we discern that the boundaries of this alliance were also
inscribed within the unique circumstances that brought it about. However, the transition of the vital
competitive alliance between brother-in-law maloqueros to the younger generation was short-lived. In
2012, Wilson moved with his family to Leticia following security issues that he encountered in the
Araracuara sector. Elias expressed sorrow at losing his ritual partner, and in 2018, he and his mother
departed from their maloca due to familial problems. In that same year, Tañe and his brother took the
uncommon initiative of collaborating with Fisi in a ceremonial dance that Fisi organized. This
occurrence had the potential to transform their relationship from one of rivalry to cooperation, guided by
a more hierarchical dynamic. However, this potential shift was hindered by the subsequent allegations
voiced by both parties following the dance, as well as Tañe’s construction of a new maloca in 2020. In

361

the upcoming section, we delve into the Andoque politics of knowledge, which will provide deeper
insight into this rivalry and others within the group.
Political Knowledge Among Centers
Knowledge is a crucial, scarce, and highly contested resource for shaping exchanges with competing
human and nonhuman centers, and it is subject to a complex politics of concealment and disclosure
among individuals and groups. Fisi and Tañe are not the only presumed heirs to Yiñékɒ’s knowledge
and captaincy skills. Three other elders, who were initiated to different traditions by Yiñékɒ, told me
that the knowledge that he granted them was accompanied by a bestowal of power, representing his
recognition in their worth and support for their actions—something not necessarily extended to others.
During a session in his maloca, one of the elders, having explained to me the symbols and logic of
dream interpretation that Yiñékɒ had taught him, remarked:
Interlocutor X: Yiñékɒ spoke to me. He told me all of that when we were alone in the maloca.
Eliran: Y was not there? Z was not there?
X: No one. Whenever someone arrived, he would tell me, “That’s enough, I am not going to talk anymore so that no
one can say ‘Yiñékɒ is teaching X, X used to accompany Yiñékɒ, he knows,’ and then they would accuse you, and
everyone would point and say, ‘You’re the one who knows, you’re the one who knows…’”
E: What would they accuse you of?
X: Because they saw him speaking to me a lot.
E: But why would they accuse you? Isn’t it a good thing that he spoke to you?
X: It’s good, but it’s also bad, isn’t it?
E: Why is it bad?
X: Because the one who knows can screw people (joder), he can overtake them in thinking (ganar en pensamiento), or
something of that sort.

According to my interlocutors, Yiñékɒ never explicitly designated a specific person as his successor or
as someone entrusted by him to lead dances, and some said that the Andoque do not do such things.131
However, when attempting to negate the power or advantage of certain individuals in terms of
leadership or dance organization, people often bring up an incident they either witnessed themselves or
heard about, where Yiñékɒ told the disciple, “You will not be capable” (no va a poder), following that
person’s disorderly drunken behavior or violent outburst. While the concealment of knowledge

This does not necessarily occur with other People of the Center. In October 2018 I attended a ceremonial dance at a
Féénemɨna maloca in the upriver Monochoa reserve that was especially designated for the transference of leadership from the
old maloquero to his son, and included a speech where the former entrusted the authority to continue ceremonial activity to
the latter.
131

362

acquisition and the dismissal of others’ knowledge, along with the power it holds, have specific aspects
unique to this succession struggle within its historical context, they also characterize the broader
Andoque politics of knowledge. Understanding these dynamics is crucial for comprehending the
interactions among human centers and the ways they operate within the context of relations with
nonhumans.
Yiñékɒ’s centrality in the post-genocide period and in the initiation processes of several of today’s
elders in the 1960s and 1970s is evident in the frequents references to Yiñékɒ by many members when
recounting myths or discussing Andoque traditions, more so than with other elders of the post-genocide
generation or—when these members are not Yiñékɒ’s children—their own parents. Anchoring the
interpretation or version of myths, ritual practices, or other customs in Yiñékɒ’s teachings—even his
pronunciation of specific Andoque words—serves to legitimize arguments and positions. This practice
inevitably implies a dismissal of competing interpretations, versions, or pronunciations.
Fisi embodies an extreme manifestation of this approach. During one of the first internal assemblies in
which I participated in September 2018, I proposed collaborating with the elders to document
ceremonial songs and create a booklet for schoolchildren. While many members liked the idea and
agreed to cooperate in private conversations, during the assembly the participants raised numerous
logistical concerns to reject the proposal. Fisi, however, voiced a different kind of concern: “I am the
only one who knows, so-so (medio-medio), the songs of the ten main Andoque dances, and I should
work in this project. Others don’t know and might provide incorrect versions. Moreover, many here
don’t pronounce the [Andoque] language well. Only a few of us—Raquel, Sabina, Henri, and I
[pronounce it well]. And also I, I could only sit in the mambeadero with my father for five years; after
that, I wanted to leave…” On another occasion, Fisi suggested to me collaborating to document myths
not included in Landaburu and Pineda’s anthology from 1984, as well as re-record some myths already
published there, once again for schoolchildren. Fisi explained that although these authors primarily
worked with his father, they also incorporated fragments from different myth versions recorded among
several elders of that generation while editing the final document. Consequently, their anthology
contains numerous errors—these errors being the divergences from Yiñékɒ’s versions. Evidently, the
context of these statements by Fisi is crucial. Both the internal assembly and our conversation about
compiling myths took place in the initial months of my stay. During this time, members were attempting
to assess the extent of my access to material resources and anticipated that research initiatives would be
associated with projects funded by an organization, including compensation for informants. This sheds
363

light on the economic factors underpinning Fisi’s portrayal of myth documentation as an urgent task and
his assertion as the sole dependable source for such tasks. Fisi’s approach echoes the strategies of other
Amazonians who seek material benefits from non-Indigenous agents, particularly researchers, in
exchange for sharing knowledge that is unevenly distributed. At the local level, the worth and content of
this knowledge are derived from an individual’s personal relationships with both human and nonhuman
agents. Yet, its value to outsiders relies on its consideration as collective immaterial heritage, which it
only becomes in the context of such communication with the outside (de Vienne and Allard 2005). In
the Andoque case, these instances speak to Fisi’s (publicly stated) claims of having a monopoly over
Yiñékɒ’s legacy, which—given that the latter served as a prime funnel for Andoque oral traditions
following the genocide—extends to the broader Andoque lore as well.
On the other hand, Andoque members—along with Fisi during certain mambeadero sessions and
internal assemblies—often acknowledge the validity of different versions of the same myths or ritual
practices. They explain that the survival of specific clans after the rubber genocide and the continuous
reproduction of their members serve as evidence for the veracity of these myth versions and traditions,
which have safeguarded them. During my initial stay at Mario’s maloca after months of visiting other
families, he, like many others, was curious about what I had learned in other mambeaderos. When I
mentioned that I would not divulge information from one place in another, he shared a story: “When I
was young, I used to move from one mambeadero to another, just like my sons do now. But later, after
having a wife and a son, I only attended Yiñékɒ’s mambeadero. Once, when he told me a story, I said: ‘I
was told this story differently elsewhere.’ Yiñékɒ told me, ‘It’s the same thing. What you heard is not an
invention, but that’s the way their clan recounts it.’ So this is what you are doing.” During our
conversations, various members invoked Yiñékɒ’s memory to criticize Fisi. They stated that, unlike his
son, Yiñékɒ always respected the teachings of others and the traditions of different clans. We may
rightfully suspect that the consensus surrounding Yiñékɒ’s figure in contemporary Andoque discourse
partially arises from his absence and a general nostalgia for his era; people also mentioned instances
where he discredited practices or interpretations by other elders. However, it seems that one of the
peacemaking responsibilities of an ideal cacique, or a leader above the clan level, is to recognize the
coexistence of diverse versions and traditions, and not to favor those of his own clan.
“There is an ‘Indigenous politics,’” Tañe explained as he recounted his initiation process with Yiñékɒ,
“For example, Cacique [Fisi] once asked me: ‘What site does your power come from?’ and I told him, ‘Parrot
Savanna.’ And he said that it’s a lie. I told him, ‘This is what your deceased father taught me.’ Yet, the deceased

364

[Yiñékɒ] had already said all this. He said, ‘People will try to correct you, but ignore them. You heard it from me, and
everything else is a lie.’ This is why I don’t tell others what I know. Otherwise, people will say ‘You’re talking lies.’
When somebody tells you you’re wrong and tries to explain to you, and you know that what you said is true, within
his words there’s a spirit that takes away your power of thought, and your thought fades away (se pierde). And
everyone is doing the same as I do. I don’t know, for example, what are Mario and Cacique’s thoughts.”

While Tañe’s anecdotes attest to the peculiarity of contemporary competition over knowledge between
elders of different clans who were trained by the same person due to the massive depletion of oral
traditions in the past century, they also reflect the centrality of the notion of secrecy in the Andoque’s
more general politics of knowledge.
Secrecy in Amazonia has been explored across various contexts, three of which are relevant for our
current purpose. First, anthropologists have noted that Amazonians feign ignorance about sorcery and
other shamanic skills or choose not to acquire them to avoid sorcery accusations or assaults by other
shamans who wish to compete with them or avenge harms that would be attributed to them (Buchillet
2004; Heckenberger 2004; High 2015). Second, among the Jivaro, the potency of an arutam vision,
centered on its owner’s encounter with a nonhuman entity, relies on its secrecy and abandons the owner
who translates it into symbols, which are then communicated with others (Harner 1984, 139; Rubenstein
2007; 2012). Finally, ethnographers of the Tukanoan-Arawakan complex in the Upper Rio NegroVaupés region pointed out the calculated economy between the possession of secret knowledge and its
publication as a sign to and key for political prerogatives and prestige (Andrello 2010; Figalli de Angelo
2020; S. Hugh-Jones 2010; 2019).
In the Andoque case, one tends to keep to oneself both the knowledge and shamanic skills one
possesses, and one’s knowledge of such capacities held by others. The notion that a person’s power,
well-being, and even their very life are contingent upon their mastery of specific stories, particularly
their clan’s origin myth, leads individuals to feign ignorance or disinterest in narratives known to others
and other forms of knowledge they possess. This precaution is taken to avert potential blame should any
misfortune befall others. Alongside the fear that engaging in serious thinking about other people,
especially those living at a great distance, exposes one’s tutelary spirit (yono̰píi) to unexpected spiritual
assaults (see Chapter 7), and unlike the doctrine of “the opacity of other minds” in the Pacific, which
concerns mainly guessing other people’s motives (e.g., Stasch 2008; Robbins and Rumsey 2008), the
underlying notion here is that knowing what other people think is not impossible, but dangerous.

365

In addition to discretion over what others may know, and although their downplaying of the knowledge
held by others may imply the speaker’s own superiority in that domain, Andoque members speak highly
of humility in relation to what one knows. One elder recounted an anecdote from his youth when he
restored old Yiñékɒ from a temporary state of madness. According to that interlocutor, when Yiñékɒ
regained his senses, he told him: “You know how to heal!” My interlocutor humbly replied: “No, I don’t
know anything. My father showed it to me, and I did it.” This modest response earned him the
appreciation of Yiñékɒ, who commented, “This is exactly what I like to hear! Other people boast that
they can cure everything, but in fact they don’t know a thing! And one has to say just like you did: ‘I
don’t know.’” My interlocutor added that Yiñékɒ himself used to say: “Everyone is afraid of Yiñékɒ,
but I don’t know anything.”
While the elders at whose settlements I stayed shared with me in their mambeaderos different myths and
traditions and mentioned some skills that they mastered, they emphasized that they would not flaunt this
knowledge in front of other members or Indigenous people of the region. Indeed, I observed their silence
whenever these skills or topics were broached in communal settings or gatherings outside their own
mambeaderos. This was particularly notable during the six-day workshop held in November-December
2018 to formulate the first parts of the cultural plan for territorial management mentioned in Chapter 8.
The workshop convened over twenty elders and younger men and women at the community school in
the settlement of the Atta Ant Clan to discuss the basic definitions of territorial components, traditional
management principles, and the ecological calendar. However, the elder participants were reluctant to
share their knowledge. The laconic information exchanged during the daytime sessions paled in
comparison with the detailed and more specific explanations offered by Fisi, his sons, and their two
Andoque guests to me and to each other in the mambeadero sessions throughout the workshop week.
Boasting about knowledge is risky as it may invite challenges from others who might use harmful
practices. Knowing (do, “to know, to see”) something depends on the relationship with the entity from
which it was learned, such as the instructor of a myth and, more significantly, its nonhuman ownerperson, whereas a skill, like sorcery or healing procedures, depends on effective mastery over its ownerperson. Therefore, competitors over skills and knowledge strive to demonstrate a closer relationship
with those owner-persons. This can result in the contestant’s monopoly over the relationship and the
cessation of communication between it and the braggart, and/or convincing that owner-person to inflict
harm—preferably related to what was bragged about—on the braggart. For example, an interlocutor
shared that he had been a skilled male midwife until he bragged about it, causing someone to take away
366

this capacity. Another interlocutor recalled how, in her youth, she and her husband had sought to gather
larvae from a tree near the house of a woman who eventually forbade them from taking “her larvae.”
Upon recounting this to Yiñékɒ, he said, “If that’s what she said, let’s see who’s the real owner of these
larvae.” Reportedly, Yiñékɒ then expelled the specific larva not only from the woman’s tree but the
entire area—and it has not returned to this day. More severe competitions over knowledge and power
are attributed to the period before the rubber genocide, when sorcerers allegedly wiped-out entire clans
through epidemics due to not being invited to dances organized by those clans, based on their perception
of the lack of invitation as a dismissal of their knowledge and status.
Similar to the Jivaro notion mentioned earlier, where the potency of an arutam vision relies on its
secrecy, Andoque members maintain that disclosing knowledge undermines its possession. I first
encountered this notion one month into fieldwork during a hunting expedition with Hector’s* son, as we
gathered a particular leaf from the forest and chewed it for protection against snake venom. When we
returned home, Hector instructed me that I should not share this information with anyone, as it would
cause it to lose its effectiveness for me. This is what happened to his wife’s brother in the past. The
brother could not cure Hector’s wife after she was bitten by a snake because he had previously revealed
this remedy. However, when Hector administered the remedy, it worked. Knowledge about healing
methods can only be shared after the successful treatment of two or more patients, which demonstrates
the assimilation of the remedy’s power into one’s own reservoir of capabilities, where it becomes
‘locked in’ and cannot dissipate. Even then, such sharing should be limited to one’s children and
siblings; in my case, they shared the secret due to my participation in the expedition. However, it is
typical for patients not to be informed about the components of the remedy or the accompanying
incantation, and healers might also request patients not to disclose who treated them.
Later during fieldwork, I encountered this belief and the prohibition on disclosing information from
other interlocutors. Within the context of healing practices, some of them emphasized its particular
relevance to procedures involving the recounting of myth segments (ǵ’a) or the invocation of the spirit
master connected to the procedure or plant in question, as opposed to simple herbal cures (ɵ’nó̰sé).
However, interlocutors asserted that this risk applies to any procedure or task governed by an ownerperson. Sharing such knowledge before fully mastering its owner-person or without obtaining
permission from it is referred to as sapiar, or “ratting,” on the owner-person, who would consequently
retract its support from the practitioner. (Interestingly, however, the procedure may work for the person
in whose ears the practitioner illegitimately explained it). “Cures are like people,” Hector’s nephew told
367

me, “When you cure someone, you give him [the person whom the cure embodies] an order, and just
like people get annoyed when too many people boss them around, and then stop working, so does the
cure. The cure is sacred, you cannot harass it.” This linkage of potent action to discretion echoes the
episode in M3, where Egret of the River Source halted his effort-free roofing of the maloca upon the
arrival of his father-in-law, leaving the laborious, time-consuming task of pui weaving to the latter, and
by extension, to humanity today. A similar incident is recounted in M6, where the axe ceased to work
autonomously upon the arrival of the father-in-law, suggesting a certain incongruence between one’s
knowledge and affines, to which we will return below.
This discretion is particularly important for myths underpinning one’s core capacities, like the myths
involving Egret of the Center for a captain or the myths centered around Shadow Egg for a healer. It is
also highly relevant for the myths affecting one’s well-being and very life, as is the clan origin myth of
any given individual. Ethnographers have documented the tendency among the People of the Center to
hide their clan origin myths from members of other clans (and ethnic group) or only provide them with
thin versions of these stories (García 2018, 415 n.21; Londoño Sulkin 2000, 330). Similar to their
neighbors, the Andoque perceive these origin myths as containing the keys to both heal and bewitch clan
members. Outsiders can latch onto specific malevolent episodes within these stories and distort them
against those individuals whose identities are embedded in them. For instance, the narrative of the war
between Sun and Moon (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 45–52) can be manipulated to sow discord
between brothers from the Sun Clan over a woman. Similarly, the tale of the cannibal Eagle can be
invoked to unleash the destructive fury of the Eagle Clan (see M9). For this reason, several interlocutors
refused to tell me their clan origin myth and only provided succinct outlines of other stories that hold
significance in shaping their personal identities. The secrecy shrouding clan origin myths is a clear
example of the boundary that agnatic ideology sets to the process of familiarization and the
consanguinizing dimensions of commensality, precluding the consideration of co-residents as complete
consanguines unless they are clan members.
Additionally, people refrain from recounting myths that encapsulate the essential vitality and potential
hazards of their territory and its beings in the presence of non-Andoque Indigenous individuals, due to
their concern that these outsiders would set the nonhuman entities of the territory against its Andoque
inhabitants or seek establishing a stronger link with them. In this context, the Nɨpóde teacher’s active
participation in the above-mentioned workshop to draft the cultural plan for territorial management had
a significant impact. It served as another reason why the Andoque participants exercised caution in
368

selecting the information they disclosed. They were wary that members of the teacher’s group might
exploit this shared information against them, either through shamanic modes of communication with
nonhuman entities or through modern means of communication with the state—i.e., by publishing
documents appropriating Andoque knowledge about the territory’s sites and their owners.
How should we understand these Andoque notions of secrecy? According to Georg Simmel’s classic
formula, the formal characteristics of the secret hold greater significance than its content. The secret
multiplies reality and creates a unique relationship between the concealers, which consequently shapes
their behavior towards the larger society, regardless of the specific content of the secret (1950, 330–31,
345). The secret’s value and the fascination it evokes depend, to a large extent, on the exclusion of
others from it (ibid, 332). It is important to note that Simmel’s argument assumes a distinction between
knowledge and practice, while the Andoque resemble other Indigenous peoples near and far (e.g.,
Londoño Sulkin 2012, 76; Norton-Smith 2010, 55–76), in viewing knowledge as inherently practical, its
value lying in its application in reality, achieving specific goals or fulfilling desires. Furthermore, in the
Andoque case, we encounter a form of secrecy that seems, at first glance, to revolve around the
individual rather than the group. It does not necessarily imply either the existence of a synchronic
“secret society,” or the diachronic reception of occult knowledge from another person, as it may also
concern knowledge acquired directly through personal experience with a plant or another substance. As
such, we might benefit from Gilbert Herdt’s (1990) perspective, which shifts our focus from viewing
secrets as a means of social differentiation between outsiders and insiders, to considering the secret as a
major ontological mechanism for the formation of the self.
Within this context, Fausto and Costa’s argument that the pet-master relations are crucial for
understanding the constitution of the “animist subject” (2019, 214–15) offers a good avenue for
exploring Andoque notions of secrecy. In Fausto’s comparative analysis of Amazonian secret flute cults
(2020, 73–121), he emphasizes the pet-master relationship established between the flute and its male
player, which involves the player feeding the flute and the flute’s dependence on the player. The human
breath fosters an identification between the player and the flute, as its flow marks the continuity between
the flute and the tubes within the human owner’s body. This melding of bodies signifies the alignment of
the flute’s agency and the spirit it embodies with that of its human owner, a relationship aiming to
enhance the reproductive capacities of the owner and, by extension, his group. The secrecy surrounding
these flutes establishes a three-term relational structure: the men who can hear and see the flutes, the
women who can only hear them, and the spirits of the flutes (ibid, 77). This framework, rooted in
369

Indigenous ontological understandings about the distribution of agency and intentionality among
nonhumans as well, counters Simmel’s assumption that the social realities that secrets create involve
only human subjects, and brings us closer to understanding the Andoque notions of secrecy.
In Simmel’s terms, the simplest structure of human sociality is a dyad, consisting of two human
elements (1950, 118–25), with the triad enriching this social reality, as each one of its three components
“operates as an intermediary between the other two, exhibiting the twofold function of such an organ,
which is to unite and to separate” (ibid, 135). By contrast, for an animist society like the Andoque’s, the
simplest inter-human social structure is not merely a dyad of two humans, but a triad that also includes a
nonhuman element, such as the coca or game they share, or the owner-person of the maloca where they
sit. By expanding Simmel’s model of the secret accordingly to encompass also nonhuman actors, we can
view an individual’s secret related to a shamanic skill, such as a healing procedure, as a social
relationship maintained by the individual with the owner-person of that skill and excluding other human
actors. The value of the secret—here, the efficacy of the remedy—is inversely proportional to the
number of individuals in the know, as the remedy would lose its potency if it became public knowledge,
“just like people get annoyed when too many people boss them around.” Such value grants the secretkeeper the power to either enforce asymmetry upon others through sorcery or to counteract such
attempts via healing.
Yet another essential asymmetry in the Andoque case, vital for a skill’s efficacy, lies between the human
practitioner and the nonhuman entity. This master-pet dynamic, as discussed in Chapter 9, aims to
minimize the likelihood of the entity resisting the practitioner’s wishes and its vulnerability to being
enlisted and mastered by another human—as might occur when someone deprives another of a
previously held skill. Hence, one can only pass on a healing method after having successfully
implemented it multiple times, or, as Fisi recounts Yiñékɒ saying, “You can only say that you know
how to cure foodstuffs for children once your youngest child gives you a grandchild,” the latter acting as
tangible evidence of the grandfather’s remedial expertise. It is also essential to remember that gaining
mastery over the nonhuman owner of a skill, for a practitioner, requires prior secrets with other
nonhuman elements, such as the owner-persons of coca and tobacco or the clan origin. This, in turn,
presupposes a continuous exchange with human clan members, ensuring the possession of a soul
(mo̰no̰i) that is in tune with the human body it inhabits. Thus, Andoque practical knowledge emerges as
a recursive framework where, on each level, human and nonhuman agencies strive to impose
asymmetries on one another or counteract them.
370

This brings us to the distinction that Andoque members make between advertising knowledge
indiscreetly and transmitting it within the clan or during an initiation process. Whereas “ratting” on an
owner-person of a skill results from the capricious, unauthorized expansion of the secret group of the
owner-person and the practitioner to include a third secret sharer, an initiation process (yitai) can be
interpreted as representing or effecting the expansion of the tutor’s body to include that third sharer. A
similar notion has been observed among the Min of Papua New Guinea, where the transmission of
important knowledge, referred to as awem and previously assumed by researchers to be limited to male
initiates, is conceptualized as “exchanging skin” (Crook 2007). Within households, individuals share
secrets with male and female members with whom they also share food and care. Such “exchanges
involving knowledge would be understood as the mutual support of persons who become encompassed
together as if they were one person” (ibid, 11).
Andoque members describe the ideal initiation process as one in which a parent or grandparent imparts
knowledge to their child or grandchild. These elder kin bestow knowledge on their younger kin out of
love—a sentiment expressed through the construct ḭ́ ’tú (“be in one’s heart”), which denotes care and
protection. Knowledge is encoded in myths, which the Andoque distinguish from other “stories” (pɨséi)
or “words, sayings” (hɵɵ́i). Myths are designated through the word ḭpoíkó, which links them with the
notion of patriclan: “that which becomes a father,” or “that which comes from the father” (Landaburu
and Pineda 1984, 80 n.46). Knowledge is, by definition, the project of a given clan center. It is created,
preserved, and shared among consanguine kins in a bid to ensure the survival of this center through the
survival and well-being of these kins. The clan survival at which knowledge aims is its survival in a
world populated by competing human and nonhuman affinal centers that attempt to hijack the members
of this clan into their respective realities. The mutual dependence between the clan and its members
recalls Herdt’s (1990) perspective on the importance of the secret for the formation and existence of the
self/person, and to his substitution of Simmel’s simple dichotomy between inside/outside with that
between multiple secret collectives and their respective ontologies. Hence, rather than simply engaging
in politics of knowledge, Andoque members envisage knowledge as inherently (cosmo)political.
This provides additional context for understanding the sexual and culinary instructions and prohibitions
surrounding apprenticeship to different specializations, such as healing, sorcery, or captaincy, that I
mentioned in Chapter 9: the success of this process in ensuring protection from this affinal world would
be thwarted if this process were accompanied by sharing foodstuffs and bodies with affines. On the
contrary, during apprenticeship, the apprentice provides the tutor with food and ritual substances in
371

exchange for teachings, such that if they are not kin yet, this nourishing enhances consubstantiality
between them. This way, an orphan residing at the maloca of another clan can access some of the
maloquero’s knowledge—work and the provision of alimentary substances compensate for the lack of
blood ties. The consubstantiality between tutor and apprentice makes the former responsible for the
latter in respect to the owner-persons of the transmitted knowledge. This is why Andoque members say
that if an apprentice disobeys his tutor by engaging in sexual activity during the initiation period, he runs
the risk of being bewitched by the tutor, who is also jeopardized by this breach.
The term for “secret” in Andoque is ̰osoi, which literally means “hidden thing,” and knowledge
concealment is often referred to through expressions such as “this is not to be told” (hɵ́má nie hɵɵ́ni).
However, there is a native concept that Andoque members consistently translate into Spanish as secretos
(“secrets”), and I argue that this concept is paradigmatic to the notion of secret knowledge crucial for the
clan’s survival and its members’ capacity to establish and maintain asymmetries with human and
nonhuman centers. This concept is ḭtasé.
While ḭtasé, as explained in the previous chapter, may refer to any offering, it is only in context of
ceremonial dances that it is translated as secretos. These special offerings of coca powder, tobacco paste,
vegetal salt, manicuera, and caguana are prepared in small amounts before the dance by male and female
consanguineous relatives of the maloquero or other workers with whom consubstantiality has been
established through prolonged exchange. Upon preparation, these offerings are kept out of reach of the
many people who typically frequent the maloca prior to a dance, until they are consumed by the
maloquero and several dance workers, and through them—by the Creator, or the owner-persons of the
dance and human group. Special attention is also paid to ensure that these offerings are not snatched
before consumption by the spirits safeguarding animals—a snatching inferred from any immoral or
aggressive behaviour by the workers during dance preparation, representing the “feeding” of malevolent
nonhumans. If this happens, the Creator would refuse the offerings, and their consumption by the
maloquero could be fatal, as reportedly occurred to one dance organizer in recent decades.
The consumption of these offerings is done on the eve of a dance—in the case of major dances, at the
opening part of the ritual of caguana distribution which precedes these dances (see next chapter). Since I
did not attend any Andoque dance, I was only informed by my interlocutors about the main happenings
of this secret moment. The maloquero and several other male workers gather at the mambeadero, and the
former summons the Creator, dedicating the offerings. He samples each of the substances and passes

372

them to the other men present. Two other men guard the maloca entrance, urging anyone outside to
enter; otherwise, the malevolent animal spirits might take them. The last man at the mambeadero to
receive caguana initiates the song (nni) of the distribution ritual, and the last to receive manicuera joins
in with reply verses. These men are joined in song by two women who “complete the words” (fohɵɵ́i) of
the song by echoing the last sounds of each verse. When the song concludes, the manguaré drums are
played. This marks the end of the secret moment, whose content—the words addressed at the Creator
and the song—is kept from anyone not present. It is especially concealed from the guest of the dance,
though he may attend the caguana distribution that follows the manguaré drumming. In sum, for the
Andoque, the essence of secrecy is this potent interaction with nonhuman entities to ensure the wellbeing of the human group, hidden from affinal relatives.
To conclude this chapter’s discussions on key power dynamics among human centers, I wish to connect
this discussion on the politics of knowledge to the concept of affinization through sorcery. Witchcraft,
beyond signifying the victim’s distancing from the sorcerer, may also draw the former closer to the
affinal world by separating them from their own consanguineously-transmitted thinking and knowledge.
One way to describe sorcery is through the verb yoíkói, which means “to deviate”—understood as a
deviation from one’s “thinking” as enshrined in clan origin myths, which serves as one’s protection
against familiarization attempts by nonhumans. A powerful curse that one can cast on another is páso’i,
giving them “a new word” to distract them from their protective words of origin. Such a curse can cause
effects ranging from relatively small nuisances like socially inappropriate behavior or bodily habits,
such as a disagreeable laughter or excessive consumption of coca, to a complete acceptance of foreign
modes of thinking and the subsequent abandonment of ritual and other practices, that typically shield
one from predation and familiarization by nonhumans. Origin myths and other stories on which a
person’s power and vitality are based must be kept hidden, lest another introduces “a new word” into
them. A similar risk exists upon the incorporation of an in-marrying wife into a household, as she may
impose, in different ways, her “woman’s word” on her husband and his clan—which, in turn, represents
the ongoing danger of familiarization by her relatives, with whom a man ideally engages in an ongoing
exchange of words, work, and substances. Therefore, all contact with non-consanguine kin involves the
risk of deviation from patrilineally-transmitted traditions, which would then leave one vulnerable to
affinization by nonhuman entities. This is one of the reasons why the familiarization of substances used
for ritual, such as coca, tobacco, and manicuera (see Chapter 6), is also crucial within the context of
communication and exchange with other human beings. This demonstrates how the Andoque’s notion of
373

power is deeply intertwined with a concentric conception of kinship, spanning from agnatic and cognatic
consanguinity to real and potential affinity or enmity, as well as a continuity between inter-human
relations and relations between humans and nonhumans. As this and the former chapter have
demonstrated, this continuity unfolds through a complex interplay of forces. The establishment of
beneficial asymmetries with other human centers and the prevention of such disadvantageous
asymmetries reinforce beneficial asymmetries with nonhumans and counteract harmful asymmetries
with them, and vice versa. In the next chapter, I will demonstrate how both the relational continuity and
the efforts to establish asymmetries manifest in the ritual context.

374

Chapter 11. Exchange and Subordination in Ceremonial Dances
In the previous chapter, while discussing rivalry and hostility between human centers and their potential
instrumentalization of each other for managing relationships with nonhuman centers, I explored the
significance of the competitive ceremonial alliance between maloquero brothers-in-law and the concept
of secrecy exemplified in the dialogues held for ceremonial purposes between one human group and
nonhumans, concealed from other human groups. In this chapter, I continue the discussion on the
Andoque’s power dynamics by examining ceremonial dances. I discuss how reciprocity and asymmetry
are managed in these pivotal moments where the relationships explored in earlier chapters between
human centers and their interactions with nonhuman entities converge.
Andoque members often describe ceremonial dances (nni) as the ultimate means of managing the
territory to ensure safe resource use by the human group and preventing predation by nonhuman entities
through illnesses, accidents, conflicts, and other misfortunes. Ceremonial dances are thus perceived as
key to enhancing reproduction—of the human group, its crops, and other flora and fauna on which its
sustenance relies—by engaging in a dialog with the territory (ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí ɵma hɵɵ́ñe). Regarding human
reproduction, this is also achieved by bringing individuals from different clans together in a festive
atmosphere, involving hours of enthusiastic dancing, which can lead to the formation of new love affairs
and eventually marriages. However, a poorly organized dance, as well as any missteps taken by
individual dancers, can have the opposite effect, resulting in epidemics and other instances of increased
predation of humans by the nonhuman entities of their territory. The stress, fatigue, and hunger during
dance preparation can lead to worker conflicts, perceived as harm caused by nonhumans, and we may
also assume that historically, dances bringing together groups from remote places may have served as
prime locations for the spread of epidemics originating from Whites that decimated entire Indigenous
populations. For these reasons, successful dance organization, reflected in the general well-being,
prosperity, and demographic increase of the group in the period following the dance, enhances a
maloquero’s prestige and capacity to mobilize people for future endeavors, ceremonial or otherwise.
This chapter delves into the interplay of dynamics that are central to the successful execution of a dance:
the hierarchy within a given human center—i.e., the non-coercive authority of a captain over his group;
the rivalry between human centers—namely, between the host and guest captains, and their respective
groups; and the hostility between human groups and the nonhuman owners of sites and species of the

375

territory. In the first section, I outline a general model that elucidates how ceremonial dances serve to
dramatize and mitigate tensions between captains and their workers, as well as conflicts between affinal
groups, as a way for addressing and alleviating antagonisms with the nonhuman entities of the territory.
In the second section, I explore the tension in Andoque dances between agnatic ideology and affinal
exchange, which corresponds to the varying degrees of symmetry or asymmetry in relations with
potential nonhuman affines that each dance seeks to achieve through familiarization.
The scarcity of contemporary Andoque dances posed limitations on my analysis. The only ceremonial
dance to have taken place during my fieldwork period was held during my stay in Bogotá due to health
issues. Therefore, my analysis relies on accounts provided by my interlocutors, recordings of songs from
various dances, narrations of origin myths, and discussions following my visits to dances at nonAndoque malocas, which allowed us to compare Andoque practices with those of neighboring groups
and delve into specific ritual elements and dynamics. During my visit in July-August 2021, I attended an
Opossum Dance organized as part of a project to revitalize the Andoque language, which included only
songs and dances, but not the more elaborate ritual dynamics discussed below. Due to these limitations,
the analysis presented here provides a general overview of ceremonial dynamics, and further
understanding of each dance and the overall system would benefit from participant observation and
micro-analyses of these dances.
Critiques and Offerings
The Andoque distinguish between “ordinary dances” (bailes ordinarios) that can be organized by any
maloquero and involve lesser prestige and fewer risks if performed incorrectly, and “proper dances”
(bailes propíos), which we may also be termed tutelary dances. Like other things which are “proper” to
one, the dances of the latter category incur more prestige to their organizers, imply a greater exercise of
power for managing exchanges with humans and nonhumans, but also involve heavier risks if performed
incorrectly. Most of them serve as venues for name giving for children (or name changing for adults),
and divide into two ritual specializations, as we will explore in the next section. The following table
indicates the contemporary Andoque dances:

376

Andoque Name
Toé
Bɵ́’p‚́kosé
Bʉ́őkn Nni
Koisé Nni/Fʉ’ii
Hḭ’hḭ’ñe
No̰ḛpa Nni
Bɨsokn Pádɨ
Hɨka Pádɨ
Tu’sí
Ḭtai
Féíkɵ
Fausíya

English Name
Opposum
Maloca Sweeping
Garden Work Dance
Fruit Dance132
Skirt Dance
Peach Palm Dance
River Turtle-Carrier Band
River Turtle-Bamboo
Multiplying Tree
Head
Armadillo
Fausíya Bird Dance

Class
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Tutelary
Tutelary
Tutelary
Tutelary
Tutelary
Tutelary

Table 9. Contemporary Andoque Dances

A few preliminary words are in order before turning to exchanges in ceremonial dances. As García
defined it for the Murui-Muina, a ceremonial dance is an assemblage of various ceremonies and ritual
actions (2016, 44). Therefore, the occasion in which an event is performed, or the performance or
omission of a certain ritual in it would qualify it as one dance and not another. For example, different
dances would be categorized as “Dance for Repairing Maloca” or “Dance for Destroying Maloca” if
they take place in proximity to these events and include certain songs and dances alluding to them. The
Opossum Dance has several variations. Some interlocutors describe it as identical to the Maloca
Sweeping Dance, with the distinction that the latter is only performed to inaugurate a new maloca after
roofing it. Additionally, The Fruit Dance includes Opossum songs, along with references to other
animals and, notably, riddles, that my interlocutors described as less complex in the Opossum Dance or
completely absent from it. While the Fruits Dance typically includes a ritually-invited guest, whose
group members pose the riddles, the Opossum Dance is often conducted without such a guest, as is the
case with the Garden Work Dance—a variation of the Opossum Dance that includes riddles and is
performed after clearing a new swidden. These variations shed light on the general dynamics in
Andoque dances.
The Opossum Dance and its variations are typically conducted at the beginning of a young captain’s
ritual career, which will gradually include more complex and prestigious dances over time, or a new
maloca’s ceremonial cycle. The Opossum Dance is celebrated by the group that constructs a maloca
after setting up the main poles and framework and thatching the roof. According to Fisi, it is based on
the story of an opossum (toé; Didelphis marsupialis) who built a house, in the form of a pile of sticks

132

According to de la Hoz Melo, Fʉ’ii means “interlocking the arms” (2005, 27).

377

and leaves, in a forest plot where other people were felling trees and later burning them to create a new
swidden. After the fire had extinguished, they saw that Opossum’s house remained intact; neither he nor
his children were harmed because he extended his tail outside of it and waved it to divert the flames.
Opossum stated: “The man who knows my spell will be able to save his house and family, just as I did.
His maloca would never burn, and his children would remain safe and healthy.” In its variation of
maloca inauguration and sweeping, the participants evoke the dens and nests of the opossum and other
birds and animals in an attempt to draw upon the protective properties and stability of these structures,
as well as the well-being of those residing in them. They may sing, for instance:
Opossum is sweeping it, so he says, he is sweeping it.
For his children Opossum is sweeping, is sweeping.
“I am doing this to live with my children,”
So he says, so says Opossum.

The dancers’ heavy stomping across the maloca’s inner space for long hours to flatten and even it,
making it safe and convenient for people to move around it and for children to play inside. Much like the
central functions of similar dances among the Murui-Muina and Féénemɨna (García 2018, 486–89;
Londoño Sulkin 2000, 387–88), this action resembles the “sweeping” (bɵ́’) of the space, clearing it of
pests and erasing the traces and odors left by dangerous animals that once frequented it when it was still
a forested area.
Pineda records another interpretation of the opossum figure, representing orphans who live in shacks
until they are incorporated into a captain’s maloca; the properties of the opossum’s tail, known for its
prehensile ability to grab leaves and sticks, here symbolize the dedication to work expected of orphans
(2014, 92). Indeed, some narrators include the toé opossum sub-specie among the orphans who were
spared from the flood by climbing the to’nnkn tree (M10; Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 83 n.130) and
associate the fire used for swidden clearing with the fiery water that once flooded the earth. This
interpretation explains why Opossum Dances, in their simpler variations, do not necessarily involve
guests from outside the maloca. Instead, they are dedicated to the maloca’s personnel and workers,
ensuring their protection both by and from their captain. During these dances, participants can gauge the
benevolent attitude of the captain towards them by singing:
He ate (ma̰’a) it, he ate it,
Did he really eat it?
Bush Dog (pʉdoɵ) ate it,

378

He ate the avocado.
The pet of fellow countryman’s daughter (saámḭ yaɵ́tɵ niéna̰) ate it.

The ceremonial songs of the People of the Center often involve critiques of the maloquero and his wife,
and to a lesser extent, other members of the organizing household (Griffiths 1998, 176; Londoño Sulkin
2000, 400–401; Lucas 2019, 313). In Andoque, such critique is referred to through the harsh verb kɒ,
which carries the aggressive connotation of an allegation, or the euphemistic verb nnhḛ, meaning “to
sing [about] someone.” According to Pineda, critiques in Andoque dances aim at raising problems
within the community in order to address and solve them (1979, 39). Londoño, whose studies among the
Féénemɨna underscore the moral aspect of their practices, suggests that dance participants use these
events as opportunities to criticize the maloquero and his household members, with the hope of
encouraging them to change their behavior (2000, 400–401; 2012, 89). My discussion of this and other
instances of Andoque criticism songs aims to provide greater specificity as it examines the function of
these songs within the context of power dynamics, where the captain attempts to organize an event that
would help him navigate both the competition with his ceremonial partner and the predatory hostility of
nonhuman entities.
In the case of this song, to dispel suspicion and address critique, the maloquero provides tobacco liquid
(yʉbʉdíe) to the singer. Through this act of commensality, the maloquero also reaffirms his own status
as a human being: his daughter, and by extension, himself, do not provide food to animals but to fellow
human household members—specifically, the singer (see also Pineda Camacho 1982, 17). Additionally,
such reactions towards human dance participants serve to redirect potential dangers and aggressions by
nonhuman entities, which are not considered legitimate commensals within that maloca. These entities
may include the bush dog, as referenced in this song, or the jaguar from the river mouth, symbolizing
the dangers associated with commerce with Whites, as illustrated in the following Opossum song:
The Son of Jaguar of Goods of the River Mouth (Okɒ́ ɵdoha ḭño̰ yaɵ́tɵ)
Is crying: “Mother, father, I want to drink.”
Above fellow countryman’s (saámḭ) harbor,
He is crying (mniɵ):
“Mother, father, I want to drink.”

Here, the maloquero rejects any potential association with a predatory force and instead adopts a
consanguineous attitude toward his personnel. These exchanges of songs and foodstuffs, aimed at
ensuring peaceful conviviality within the maloca, clarify why, unlike other dances, the presence of

379

individuals unaffiliated with that maloca, such as affinal relatives, is not imperative. In several Opossum
Dances reported by Andoque members in recent decades, there were no official guests. Instead, the
maloquero spread the word about the upcoming dance informally to those who had participated in
maloca construction, as well as to other Andoque families.
The Garden Work variation of the Opossum Dance (Bʉ́őkn Nni), held at the conclusion of a collective
swidden clearing and planting (fokaa), can also be conducted without a formally invited external guest.
In the past, when Andoque malocas were more populous and clans were larger, a maloquero could
collaborate with an internal guest—such as an elder man among his personnel who would lead the rest
of the workers, engaging in a dialogue that includes the necessary offerings to the owner-persons of the
different phases of the work. The critique songs in the dance, involving allusions to fruits and other
foodstuffs, represent the workers’ complaints against the captain and his household members—despite
their hard work, the dance does not provide enough food. In such critiques, we may perceive an
expression of a “society against the state” (Clastres 1989) where group members check the captain’s
power and clarify the limits they would accept regarding any accumulation or misuse of it. The
provision of tobacco paste and manicuera to the singers represents the captain’s response, demonstrating
to the workers that the products of their labor are available and that he did not exploit them or abused his
authority. This familiarizing commensality contrasts with the undesirable expression of anger by the
captain and other dance organizers in response to such critiques, a reaction that would reflect a predatory
attitude toward the singers and the personnel in general.
The harvest of a garden created through such collective efforts is directed at collective ends—which will
also contribute to the captain’s accumulation of prestige—as it is used to hold future ceremonial dances
at the maloca. In this way, Opossum Dances, which may include only the maloca or clan personnel
without necessarily involving a formally invited guest, presuppose and prepare the ground for the
eventual organization of dances with external guests, and the captain’s ceremonial alliance with another
maloquero, who is ideally his brother-in-law. The Fruit Dance, which is celebrated after the creation of a
new garden, typically involves such external participation.
A central component of this dance is riddle songs concerning offerings of fruits and propagules for
planting in the new garden, or small game associated with it, by the participants. Carrying the offering
hidden on his shoulder and protecting it from the dance organizers, the participant sings a song alluding
to a specific origin story of their offering, referencing one of its properties or an animal or plant

380

associated with it. He only releases the offering once the host solves the riddle. This component
introduces a competitive dimension to the dance, which is either absent or less pronounced in internal
Opossum Dances that do not involve formally invited guests. As noted by ethnographers of neighboring
peoples with a similar dance, these riddle songs may be enjoyable for most of the participants who dance
and rejoice, but the host and his men struggle to solve them (Griffiths 1998, 166; Londoño Sulkin 2000,
393–96; Lucas 2019, 328–29). This song, for example, is a riddle referring to chili:
We are going to call grandmother.
To mother, to grandmother,
From today to tomorrow (níɒ̰pɵ unńka) she will give fruits (oinabɨi).

By demonstrating his knowledge of the origin of the different cultivars and solving the riddles, the host
decontaminates them from the potential harms they may contain, ensuring safe, life-giving nutrition for
his personnel. As among the Murui-Muina, successfully responding to all these riddles demonstrates the
host’s legitimacy as captain—the successor of Egret of the River Source who created the first maloca
and garden (García 2018, 708). By contrast, failing to solve a riddle is humiliating for the host, who
could not keep up with the challenges posed by his guests, and it exposes him to malevolent nonhuman
entities who take note of his vulnerability concerning certain flora and fauna.
Both the host and guest rely on their prior participation in such dances, where they paid careful attention
to the songs. They gather with their respective groups to narrate and learn relevant origin stories during
the mambeadero sessions preceding the dance. If the host and his group encounter difficulties in solving
the riddle, the singer may include hint verses in his song to assist them. Thus, the competitive dimension
is complemented by an element of alliance and collaboration. This collaborative aspect is further evident
in the fact, recurring in other dances, that the rivalry with the guest (and his group) affords the host (and
his group) an opportunity to assert control and exercise domination over potentially harmful nonhuman
entities, thereby safeguarding the well-being of his personnel. When inviting the guest, the host can
specify the category of plants they wish to receive and learn to control, beginning with domesticated
cultivars and progressing to wilder plants. Similar to other instances where hosts can, to some extent,
coordinate songs and offerings with their guests, this demonstrates the idea that rivalry between
maloqueros helps them effectively manage interactions with nonhuman entities. Finally, the act of
planting seeds and propagules in the garden the following day symbolizes the fertilization of the host
group by the guest’s group and the commensality between them. This symmetrical exchange between

381

human affines (ideally, real ones) thus serves to achieve an asymmetrical exchange between them and
nonhuman potential affines.
Similar to other ritual contexts worldwide (e.g., Eade 1992; Sallnow 1981), the tension between
collaboration and rivalry in ceremonial alliances is an essential dimension in Andoque dances. In the
Andoque case, this tension is vital for enhancing the maloqueros’ ability to manage their interactions
with nonhumans. Although my Andoque interlocutors do not put it in these terms, I suggest that this
duality is also constitutive of the guest’s status, who, from the host’s point of view, is located midway
between the latter’s consanguine kin and nonhuman entities, on a spectrum of alterity. This duality
begins at the invitation ritual, which occurs approximately one week after the host maloquero and his
wife have gathered their personnel, shared coca powder, tobacco paste, and manicuera with them to
align their agencies to their own and achieve unanimity among the workers, and made satisfactory
progress with some of the preparation tasks. During these days, the host sends a messenger to informally
notify the guest of the dance and of his forthcoming visit to extend a formal invitation. Subsequently, the
guest dispatches his own men to go for an initial hunting expedition. The formal invitation ritual is
marked by the joint consumption of tobacco paste brought by the host,133 which the guest also shares
with his personnel. On this occasion, the host provides the guest with a substantial quantity of coca
powder and a “salt cake” to distribute among his men, and places a hot casabe on the guest’s shoulders
to remove his anger. If the guest and his personnel have already obtained game, he exchanges it with the
host for the tobacco paste and salt, thereby making this animal one of the focal points of the ceremony’s
songs.
From this moment on, the guest and his personnel are referred to as the ḭtáu’fa, “the one(s) who
receive(s) tobacco.” This term signifies their reception of tobacco paste, both at the time of the invitation
and while they dance in the ceremony. This term is also used to describe the dances that occur at the
beginning of the ceremony in the afternoon and during its final hours before sunrise, which involve the
guest group, thereby emphasizing the central role of the guest in the dance. These phases are considered
more serious, in the sense of being more significant for the intended negotiation with nonhuman entities
during the dance, and they pose greater challenges and risks for a singer-dancer who falters, compared to
the intermediate phase, which is seen as mere diversion. The latter part is called nnhḛ nni, or “singing
ball,” primarily celebrated by participants who have not received formal invitations to the dance but
133

For a similar practice among neighboring peoples, see García 2018, 604; Londoño Sulkin 2012, 98.

382

attend because they enjoy singing and dancing (nnhḛ). Dancers from the guest group typically refrain
from participating in this phase to conserve their energy and prepare for their early morning
performance. During the regional dances I attended, it was common for a maloquero who had not
received a formal invitation to the dance to refrain from attending, as being included among the common
participants was considered demeaning (his wife and children might still attend). While the dance
organizers provide food for the guest group, they are not responsible for uninvited participants, who
bring their own supplies or may purchase snacks from participant sellers or even the non-Indigenous
peddlers coming for business from Puerto Santander. A clear division is thus maintained between the
formal guest and his group of dancers and the rest of the non-organizing participants.
After the invitation ritual concludes, the guest must coordinate the training of his men for the songs and
dances they will perform during the ceremony, prepare any necessary costumes or accessories for this
particular ceremony, and procure additional game to repay the tobacco paste and salt provided to them.
As with other People of the Center (Gasché 2009, 26), the tobacco paste and, especially, the salt cake
given by the host to the guest are intended to enhance hunting by their consumers, so that the nonhuman
owners of animals and sites of the territory would release for them their “orphans.” Any animal hunted
by the members of the guest’s group, as well as individuals affiliated with them, during the preparation
days must be brought to the host’s maloca. In the interpretation I propose in this section, from this
invitation ritual on, the guest and his personnel serve as a mediating channel between the host and the
nonhuman entities of the territory. While the members of the guest’s group, as affinal human relatives
(and ideally, real ones), are closer to the nonhuman realm of potential affines than the host’s
consanguine kin, the consumption of the ritual substances provided by the host establishes
consubstantiality whereby the host has familiarized them and influenced their actions. However, the
process of familiarization does not go in the other direction, as the host must not receive contributions of
raw cultivars or prepared ritual substances for the dance from members of the guest’s group, even if he
encounters a shortage of such cultivars or substances before the event.
The guest group becomes dependent on the thoughts and behavior of the dance organizers, a term
encompassing here both the maloquero and his personnel. Any intention or expression of violence,
anger, or sexuality among the organizers during the preparation period can put them at risk of illnesses,
snake bites, and accidents during their own preparatory tasks, including hunting expeditions and travel
to the event. The organizers must observe these behavioral “diet” rules (dieta) the violation of which

383

jeopardizes themselves as well. I heard several accounts about dance organizers and workers who
fainted, referred to through the root yi, like “illness,” after conflicts with their co-workers. As García
observed for the Murui-Muina (2018, 489–90), the Andoque believe that during dance preparation,
malevolent nonhuman entities, aware that the dance seeks to enhance human reproduction at their
expense, are determined to sabotage it by provoking such inappropriate behavior and sentiments among
the members of the organizing group. Another restriction on which my interlocutors commented sheds
light not only on the reason why violence, anger, and sexuality are particularly problematic, but also on
why they endanger the guest group as well. This restriction concerns looking at a mirror, with one
interlocutor stating that when a dance worker sees their face in the mirror, the animals become alert (se
levantan) and provoke various forms of aggression. As he vaguely explained, “something there flips
over” (algo ahí se voltea). The gaze is associated with sorcery and predation (Pineda Camacho 1979,
40), and turning it toward oneself represents the cannibal tendency to direct it also toward one’s kin. To
achieve the dance’s general aim of safeguarding the human group by familiarizing harmful nonhuman
potential affines, the dance organizers and workers must ensure that their relationships are not
influenced by predatory affinizing tendencies, such as aggressiveness or sexuality, which is also
conceived as a form of predation. Such tendencies would represent the converse, undesired situation of
their own familiarization by the animals. Given that the guest group has become a consanguineous
extension of the organizers through the commensality of the invitation ritual, any affinization of the
latter by nonhuman entities can also transfer to the guests, causing misfortunes that would be interpreted
as predation by nonhumans.
The only material transaction in the opposite direction, from guests to organizers, is game, which is
subject to a multistep compensation procedure with significant implications for the dance’s objective of
“territorial management.” This game is referred to by the general term ḭsía (“that which is one’s own”)
or nḭhḛ́fɒta, specific to ceremonial dances. The verb ḭhḛ́, meaning “to finish [food],” alludes to the
consumption of the meat during the event. Game can be brought to the host’s maloca either as food for
the workers before the dance or for the opening of the dance itself. As the hunter approaches the maloca,
he sings a yó’sói song alluding to the animal and the site where it was hunted. Upon receiving the game,
the host and his wife must provide tobacco paste and manicuera. Similar to the Murui-Muina (García
2018, 677–78), the Andoque perceive the hunters as carriers of the heat and odors of the forest and its
numerous hostile agencies. Providing tobacco and manicuera calms down (sḭ́ ) these intermediaries
between the maloca and the forest, between consanguinity and affinal alterity. A hunter who delivers
384

game at the beginning of the event enters the maloca dancing and playing a flute, and a woman from the
host group accompanies him, symbolizing an additional form of compensation for his contribution,
which helps to calm him. These measures prevent the hunters from transmitting the dangerous properties
of nonhuman entities to the dance organizers, as such transmission can have harmful consequences. For
instance, a temporary state of madness experienced by Yiñékɒ before one dance, which he oversaw, is
attributed to the young maloquera’s failure to offer manicuera to the hunters.
At the beginning of the dance, after all the hunters have delivered their game to the organizers, the
organizers repay them (ɵpáha) for their game and any costumes they may have prepared for that specific
dance. Compensation is provided in the form of various domestic products, including casabe, chili broth,
tobacco paste, and peanuts. To ensure that each hunter receives compensation commensurate with their
contribution, as well as women and uninvited participants who brought lesser categories of game
(including gathered larvae or purchased products from Puerto Santander), the organizers raise each
contribution, shouting: “Whose is it?” While among neighboring people, such as the Féénemɨna whose
dance I attended and the Nɨpóde as described by Griffiths (1998, 167), the hunters respond by shouting
“Yours!” (suyo, in the second person singular), indicating the host as the game’s new owner, the
Andoque reply “Mine!” (oɵsi kḛ). This can be seen as the Andoque’s attempt to delay the transfer of
ownership until actual remuneration, accompanied by the host’s declaration, such as ódo kḛ knsia osaa:
“this is my [value in] casabe [for] your game” (Jon Landaburu 2007, 26). This exchange represents the
taming of dangerous external faunal products through the use of domestic maloca products.
The guest’s personnel are provided with ritual substances as a group, facilitated by their leader and his
wife, who are offered dry tobacco paste (yʉbʉ yɵkɒkn), a salt cake, and manicuera by the host and his
wife before they enter the maloca to distribute among their personnel. These substances remove their
anger and ensure their consubstantiality with the organizers. However, as noted above, this
commensality can pose risks if these substances have not been properly prepared. The vegetal salt,
prepared for a dance, involves stricter and more numerous rules regarding sexuality, speech, movement,
and the presence of women (see Chapter 6). It serves as a “litmus test” to assess the organizers’
adherence to the dance preparation etiquette. If a guest receives an imperfect salt cake, such as one with
a dark color or full of holes, its appearance can reveal which rules the workers have violated. This
jeopardizes both the host and guest groups, potentially rendering the dance ineffective or even
dangerous, especially if malevolent spirits have already seized the ritual offerings. The guest can also

385

discern issues with the dance organization from adverse weather conditions, such as rainfall on the way
to the event, which may soak his men’s costumes and accessories, making it challenging to dance
effectively, because an adept host would prevent such adverse weather through spells, communication
with spirits, and restriction of his own contact with liquids.
If members of the guest group have such complaints against the organizers, or if they have encountered
accidents or illnesses in the preceding days, they can harshly criticize them in their songs, and in more
extreme cases, resort to more aggressive measures. I was told about a dance organized in La Savana by a
Féénemɨna captain in the 1950s with Yiñékɒ as a guest. On their way there, several members of the
Andoque group, including two of Yiñékɒ’s children, fell ill and experienced accidents. Since these
incidents were perceived as the result of the dance organizers’ lack of adherence to the proper behavioral
“diet” and the suspected incompetence of their captain in conducting dances, upon approaching the host
maloca, the Andoque delegation damaged the gardens through which they passed, felling fruit trees and
singing the songs of the ko’yaiɵ monkey (Cebus albifrons), known for his rude behavior. Upon reaching
the maloca, they used an improvised thatch fork to damage the maloca’s roof, to the horrified cries of
women and children inside.
This recalls the rivalrous dynamics between the two groups, an initial distrust and antagonism that the
sharing of foodstuffs must alleviate and replace with more benevolent tendencies. Similar to other
Amazonian welcoming ceremonies (Costa 2017, 160–61; Surrallés 2003), far from minimizing the
tension and competition between affinal groups, the parties, and especially the guest group, exaggerate
them through identification with dangerous or unruly nonhuman entities. The thatch fork attack is a case
in point, as this tool is typically used during a special ceremony to disassemble the maloca of a retiring
captain. During this ceremony of costume enactment (i’kɒisétai, “head toy”), which opens the dance in
which it takes place, two dancers from the guest group tear down the roof from outside the maloca in
their impersonation of the powerful winds from the river source and river mouth. Meanwhile, dancers in
animal costumes sow chaos inside the maloca: woodpeckers banging the main poles with sticks,
dragonflies sullying the ground with red caguana, and monkeys ravaging the space and harassing the
participants. The dancers only calm down after they are provided sufficient tobacco paste and manicuera
by the host’s personnel.
The songs of the ḭtáu’fa phases likewise attest to the rivalrous and competitive dynamics between the
host and guest, the overcoming of which, like in the Fruit Dance, is a condition for managing

386

relationships and achieving asymmetries with nonhuman entities. Since these songs are perceived as
more powerful and dangerous than the “singing ball” songs, it was more difficult for me to record them.
However, I gathered from people’s explanations that these songs address core themes of the dance and
its associated myths, as well as the origin of the game animals brought to the dance and the sites where
they were hunted. These songs maintain the tone of critique and dissatisfaction with the host and the
organizers’ actions, eliciting from them the provision of tobacco liquid (yʉbʉdíe) and manicuera that
would prove the opposite. For example, a song from the Multiplying Tree Dance goes:
The cold of Rainbow Anaconda (dónn̵̋ɵ hɵpɵ yano̰síkői)
With it the tree was formed (tiɵ)
And with this you are playing (i’kɒniɵ)?
Was it formed together with you?
With this tree you are playing.
Before everything else (ḭpɵikóañé),
When the Speaking Tree was formed
This tree was formed,
And you are playing with it.

The singer suggests that the host of the Multiplying Tree Dance is not treating the tu’sí beam, around
which the dance is centered, with the seriousness it deserves. By providing him with ritual substances,
the host assures the singer that he knows and respects the relevant origin myths, thereby strengthening
his hold over the nonhuman entities whose agencies he wishes to appropriate. In this way, the challenges
posed by the singers grant the host an opportunity to increase his control over the nonhuman world.
Another song from the same dance expresses suspicion that the maloca’s beam does not embody its
proper owner-persons, which enhance social reproduction, but rather violent forces from the river mouth
that are detrimental to the Andoque:
Where is it, where is the seat of goods (dohai ɵkupa)
To which we have come?
Seat of Goods of the River Mouth (ɵkɒ́ dú’dɨ yakupa) Came here.
Thunder of Goods (dohai dú’dɨ) came here.
Thunder of the River Mouth (ɵkɒ́ dú’dɨ) is here.
Jaguar of the Axe (pɵɵḭño̰) is at your place.

By offering the singer ritual substances, the host wards off these dangerous forces and establishes the
benevolence of his multiplying beam. In the Head Dance, which is based on M18 that narrates the
387

transformation of a group of dance guests into peccaries, the provision of substances to the singer who
reminds the participants of that misfortune prevents its reoccurrence:
At this time of the day
All of them
Went from one garden to another.
Are they not ashamed (ñó̰kn)?
We transformed (yokatiani) them, we transformed them,
[They are] yours no more.
We transformed them, we transformed them.
Your orphans (íhɵ́ɵá)
We transformed your animals.

This way, offering tobacco paste and manicuera to the singers who evoke potent nonhuman entities
rejects the harms that some of them seek to inflict on the group celebrating the dance, while embracing
the capabilities with which others can endow it.
In various dances, notwithstanding the rewards that the host gives the guest, the final song with which
the guest dancers leave the maloca attests to their bitter feeling of not being sufficiently compensated.
For instance, this is how they express their farewell in the River Turtle-Carrier Band Dance:
These are, these are
The youth of Rainbow Anaconda (Dónn̵̋ɵ Hɵpɵ yayɨḛn),
Who stayed the night at your place,
Without licking [tobacco].
They have already left,
without drinking [manicuera]
They have already left.

Although my interlocutors assured me that this song carries a humorous tone, from the reports that I
have gathered on Andoque dances and from my observations at ceremonies of neighboring
communities, I did not receive the impression that, by the end of the dance, the host and guest groups
form a single, undifferentiated group, as S. Hugh-Jones reports for the Tukanoans of the Vaupés River
(2001, 266–67).
The songs addressing the game animals brought to the dance, the sites where they were obtained and
their site-persons are crucial for the successful achievement of territorial management. Unlike their
Murui-Muina neighbors, the Andoque do not perceive the animals hunted before dances as the
388

troublemakers among their respective groups, whom their owner-persons would happily discard (García
2018, 493–95). Neither have I received from them clues to the existence of a similar belief to the MuruiMuina’s perception that hunting animals in itself is a victory over the diseases and moral dangers that
they embody (Echeverri 2022, 148–61; but see my discussion in Chapter 9 that concerns specific
shamanic acts). For these reasons, the animals’ owner-persons are angry and vengeful toward the dance
participants, and overcoming the diseases and dangers carried by their “children” is achieved by
providing offerings to these spirits. By evoking these nonhuman entities, the singer draws their attention
to that maloca, where they are provided offerings of tobacco paste and manicuera by the host group
through their provision to the singer, who, as part of the guest group, serves as an intermediary channel
between the organizers and the faunal world. Although a dance can be organized to compensate and
appease the owner-persons after a period of excessive faunal harvest, additional hunting for the event
itself is key for demonstrating to these entities who their specific “children” are, for which the human
participants want to compensate them, ensuring that the offerings would have an effect. Therefore, the
more categories of game brought to a dance, the more diverse the nonhuman owner-persons provided
offerings, and the more comprehensive the territorial management aimed at preventing potential harms
by these entities.
By invoking the animals’ owner-persons in his song, the hunter absolves himself from any “debt” he
may have incurred to these entities through hunting their personnel. Instead, this debt is transferred to
the host, who, along with his group members, will face the consequences of retaliation by the nonhuman
entities if he fails to provide them with sufficient ritual substances through the mediation of the guest
group. Any illnesses and misfortunes that occur in the period following a ceremonial dance are often
interpreted as inadequate compensation for songs related to game and other songs that evoke nonhuman
entities. Insufficient offerings for game or the songs sung about it may necessitate the organization of
another dance, for which more game must be brought, along with more generous compensation.
The host maloquero thus faces a dilemma. On the one hand, bringing more game to his dance allows
him to negotiate and appease a larger number of nonhuman entities, providing broader protection against
potential harm to his people. This can also enhance his prestige, as he becomes known as a captain who
can manage significant amounts of game, protect the territory, and secure the necessary labor for such
endeavors. On the other hand, Andoque maloqueros frequently complain about their challenges in
securing a dedicated and capable workforce for dances, as well as contributions of tobacco and manioc

389

from fellow members who are not part of the guest group. If they fail to reciprocate game and songs
with a sufficient amount of ritual substances derived from these cultivars, the consequences can be
catastrophic.
In making his case for the relevance of the gift paradigm to Amazonia, S. Hugh-Jones argued that in
Northwest Amazonian ceremonial dances, foodstuff exchanged between guests and hosts represent
detached parts of their donors, thereby embodying them (2001, 271–72). More specifically, guests who
give fish or meat incarnate the spirits of fish and animals, such that, “in an inversion of predatory
cannibalism, the guests detach parts of themselves, metaphorically their children or kin, and offer these
up as sacrificial substitutes for consumption by their hosts” (idem 2013, 371–72). In other words, gift
replaces predation, and consuming game replaces the consumption of the guest. While the foodstuff
exchanged before and during Andoque dances certainly carry the gift characteristic of representing their
donors and their actions, my impressions concerning the Andoque’s (and other People of the Center’s)
ritual practices does not lead me to conclude that game substitutes for the guests. Nonetheless, the guests
do represent nonhumans as they mediate the exchange with them. However, the transacted items have
functions beyond (hetero)substitution, as I have shown. Akin to the wider meanings of ḭtasé offerings,
they also have manipulative and thought-shaping functions, intended to tame, calm, and ultimately
dominate nonhuman beings. As we shall now see, one such function is to demonstrate the host’s
superior relationship with nonhuman entities in comparison with the guest, who is here a human rival of
the host, rather than a representative of nonhumans or mediator in exchange with them.
To ensure that the guest does not bring game in classes and quantities that are beyond the host’s ability
to compensate, the latter often resorts to a common Andoque solution: hiding game animals from the
guest. While giving him a salt cake upon the invitation for success in hunting, the host limits this success
by burying another salt cake at his own maloca, under the spot in the mambeadero where yarumo ashes
are burned. Additionally, the salt given to the guest may also be manipulated, guiding him toward
encountering only the types of game desired by the host. However, while the host may try to minimize
his debt to the spirits, the guest works to maximize it, in a way that emphasizes the competition between
the two. The hunters of that group attempt to bring as much game as they can, which attest to both their
hunting skills—an important sign of masculine prowess—and to their greater command over the ownerpersons, who revealed their animals despite the host’s maneuvers. The occurrence of most tutelary
Andoque dances—the ones with the largest attendance and where the importance of the dialog with

390

spirits is magnified—in July-August makes the host’s control over a maximum amount of obtained
game more difficult. While this period is marked by the abundance of the mauritia fruits used to concoct
the special caguana for the distribution ritual on the eve of these dances, as the height of the rainy season
where water levels are at their peak, it is also the time when coveted land animals are concentrated in the
ever-smaller stretches of non-inundated forest and are thus easier to spot. The timing of those dances
also complicates the host’s task of rain prevention. All these factors combine to heighten the challenge
that the guest presents to the host, raising the stakes of their competition for prestige and their usual
rivalry as maloquero in-laws by summoning nonhuman entities to whom the parties could become
indebted. The outcome of this challenge may be, for the host, either predation by these entities or a more
effective familiarization and domination over them, which will typically lead him to pose a greater
challenge to his ceremonial partner when it is the latter’s turn to host a dance.
The “singing ball” songs, typically sang by participants who do not belong to the invited maloquero’s
group, also heighten the challenge. These songs criticize the host and his household members for their
stinginess, laziness, diversion from ancestral teachings, and other vices that contribute to the lack of
sufficient ritual substances at the dance. In the River Turtle-Bamboo Dance, for example, they may sing:
At the central pole of the maloca,
Here was prepared the caguana that we came in order to drink.
You did not offer us a drink.
“My daughter, serve me
The abundant caguana of your father,
Which I have come in order to drink,”
I am asking her.
Without bathing, she prepared it.
I do not want to receive it from you,
I do not want to receive it from you,
At the place to which we arrived.

Although these songs do not require the host to provide the singers with ritual substances whose absence
may prove dangerous, they should be viewed as contributing to the general pressure that he is under.
Sung by non-maloquero individuals, including non-members of the host’s household who are
nonetheless affiliated to his maloca, and considered inappropriate for a captain, they represent the
tendency of “ordinary members”—as already noted in relation to the Opossum songs—to check and
restrain their captain’s power, reminding him of his dependence on their work and contributions, and of

391

their expectations for reward and recognition in exchange. This brings us back to the relevance of the
relationship between captain and ordinary men to understand ritual dynamics. In order to successfully
respond to his guest’s challenges and secure the desired domination over nonhumans, the host depends
on workers to maintain the maloca in good shape and produce large amounts of food and ritual
substances. The larger the workforce, the more ritual substances can be provided to meet the guest’s
challenges.
Summing up, the horizontal exchange of foodstuffs and words for ceremonial substances with the
(ideally, real) affinal ceremonial partner, which is necessary to turn the dangerously symmetrical
relationship with nonhuman potential affines into an asymmetrical exchange of agencies and (animal)
bodies that is beneficial for the human group, assumes the existence of a vertical exchange of agencies
and substances between the maloquero and his personnel. The presentation of gift-like items, which
serve as extensions of their donors, before and during ceremonies, derives its significance from a
broader context of generalized predation, whose potential adversarial consequences they are intended to
mitigate. As we have noted in passing throughout Part III, the captain’s prestige and related capacity to
mobilize people for work or establish and maintain ceremonial alliances with others depends on his
demonstrated success in negotiating with nonhuman entities, particularly through ceremonial dances.
Therefore, we may conclude that these three classes of relationships (captain/ordinary people; two
maloqueros; human-nonhuman) contain tensions, the manifestation and alleviation of each is crucial for
the alleviation of the tensions inherent in the other classes of relationships, and, thus, for the
advantageous management of these relationships.
Agnatic and Human Asymmetries in Ceremonial Dances
So far, I have analyzed the general dynamics of antagonism and exchange within Andoque dances. The
emphasis on exchange between humans and nonhumans in these dances should not be misconstrued as
striving for equilibrium and harmony. Instead, it primarily seeks to establish asymmetry between the two
parties with the goal of ensuring the well-being, prosperity, and social reproduction of members of the
human group, to benefit from the bodies and agencies of nonhuman entities while preventing any
reciprocal transfers in the opposite direction. In this section, I further explore the asymmetrical power
relations that the Andoque strive to establish with nonhuman beings by focusing on the tutelary dances
and Andoque members’ perspectives on the importance and dangerousness of these dances, as well as
their respective centrality or marginality in contemporary ritual practice. This asymmetry involves a

392

degradation in the agencies of some of the nonhuman entities of the territory, and is intricately linked
with agnatic ideology, as the dances that are more esteemed and conducted more frequently emphasize
patrilineal descent, at the expense of affinal exchange.
The Andoque categorize their tutelary dances into two ritual specializations, to which they refer as
“careers” (carrera), alluding to a maloquero’s gradual inclusion of more complex and prestigious dances
into his repertoire: “Red” (Peɒɵsí; literally: “essentially red”) and “White” (Pó’fiɵ). The Multiplying
Tree and River Turtle-Carrier Band Dances fall into the red category, while the Head, River TurtleBamboo, Armadillo, and Fausíya are classified as white.134 The following table will serve for reference
in our discussion on the two ritual specializations:
Red Specialization Dances (Peɒɵsí)
Multiplying Tree
River Turtle-Carrier Band

White Specialization Dances (Pó’fiɵ)
Head
River Turtle-Bamboo
Armadillo
Fausíya

Table 10. The dances of the two ritual specializations

People become associated with either specialization if they are given a name in a red or white dance,
give their children names in such a dance, or otherwise organize them. Therefore, not all Andoque
members are associated with this or that specialization. Besides the distribution of several dances
between the two specializations, those affiliated with either specialization sing different songs from the
ones sung by members of the other specialization, and they also dance differently from them, often using
distinct ritual instruments, in the dances they organize.
Each of the two colors is associated with other colors. Red (peɒi), symbolizing blood, is associated with
black (huɒi), which represents war. Conversely, white (pó’te̋) is thought to encompass the colors yellow

Although the Peach Palm Dance is generally considered a non-tutelary ceremony that does not fit into either category, my
interlocutors made vague, decontextualized references to its red characteristics. On the one hand, the association between the
hero of its origin myth and Sun, a “red” figure (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 53 n.3, 190), can partly account for a possible
red characterization of this dance. On the other hand, unlike the other tutelary dances, the Peach Palm Dance is held at the
peak of the dry season (January-February) when peach palms are ripe, rather than at the peak of the wet season, and does not
include the distribution of a caguana made of mauritia, whose fruits abound in the that season. I attribute the defiance of the
red-white classification by the Peach Palm Dance to its recent introduction into the Andoque repertoire, as it appears to have
been imported by Yiñékɒ or other individuals in the generations preceding him from downstream regions. Its main songs (of
the mask part) are in another Indigenous language, which some interlocutors identify as Tanimuka and others as Letuama and
Macuna, and refer to mythical events that occurred further downstream from Drawing River (Hḭ’ḭse), located at the
downriver limit of the Andoque ancestral territory (ibid, 190–201), toward the territories of the Miraña, Yucuna, and
eventually Tanimuka, Letuama, and Macuna (see also Pineda Camacho 1976, IV; for similar views among the Miraña, see
Karadimas 2007, 108). Therefore, I will not treat this dance here as a red one.
134

393

(dóői), green (payɒi), and blue (pa̰ ̰así),135 which overall represent life and prosperity (although one
interlocutor commented on yellow’s association with disease). Since naming a person in a certain way is
thought to shape their personality, I learned during my first weeks among the Andoque that they
perceive those named in a red dance as people of war, prone to outbursts of anger, and those named in
white dances as calm, peaceful, and polite.
However, from an early stage, I also discovered the disdain and distrust that many members harbor
toward the white specialization, even among individuals who are themselves affiliated with it, in
contrast to the red specialization, which is almost unanimously held in high esteem. As we will see,
white dances are celebrated today less than red ones, with fewer children given names in them and fewer
malocas dedicated to them. At first glance, this tendency seems surprising when compared with accounts
of the general shift among the People of the Center from a bellicose, predatory pre-genocide discourse
referred to as the “Basket of Darkness,” upon which people draw only on rare occasions and in limited
contexts, to the “Basket of Life,” representing public discourse suited for inter-clan and inter-ethnic
cooperation (Echeverri 2010). As we have seen in Chapter 4, the red Multiplying Tree, which involves
bellicose songs and exhibits a predatory discourse, became crucial for the Andoque’s post-genocide
recuperation, complicating the simple dichotomy between bellicosity and peace or life. On the other
hand, the Bora’s way to conceptualize their recent history may prove more useful to understand the
Andoque’s preference for one ritual specialization over another. As Lucas shows, the Bora divide their
history between a pre-genocide “Time of Animals,” marked with communication with nonhuman
entities for sorcery, healing, and other ends, and the contemporary “Time of Abundance,” in which
people act and protect themselves through direct communication with tobacco, to which humans, in
contrast with animals, have privileged access (2019, 115–40). This resonates with the Andoque’s
distinction between Animal Stories and Captaincy Stories, as discussed in Part I. Therefore, the peaceful
or aggressive dispositions associated with the white and red specializations are to be sought primarily in
the ways in which each attempts to manage relations with and contain dangers posed by nonhuman
potential affines and the human agents mediating communication with them in dances—i.e., real affines.
The main traits of the Andoque tutelary dances are found in several of the myths narrated in previous
chapters, and I will provide here additional information on each dance that is relevant to this section’s
purpose. The red Multiplying Tree Dance, as explored in Chapter 4 and demonstrated by M11 (in
135

People often conflate the two latter colors.

394

Appendix 1), revolves around a phallic dancing beam embodying a red anaconda and enhancing the
reproduction of group members and their crops. This beam is perceived as aggressive and predatory, and
the dance is considered the seat (kupa) of all other dances, anchoring the exchange occurring in them
within a firm patrilineal identity. As we have seen, the ceremonial songs likewise include allusions to
the seat. It is described as the first dance in Andoque mythology, but the last one that a maloquero
organizes, following lesser, more recent dances. The multiplying beam is related with the river source—
the direction of fertility and ancestry—through its association with Purple Tapir (Bu Ḭtɵ), who, after the
flood, went to the river source and appeared in that direction as the auspicious morning rainbow,
foretelling the abundance of crops (see also de la Hoz Melo 2005, 42). This is why, in dances, the
multiplying beam is painted with the colors of the rainbow. The preparation of a new beam takes place
in the forest, where the maloquero and his men choose and fell a suitable itauba (Mezilaurus itabua) or
balata (Manilkara sp.) tree, according to Tañe (ibid, 74), or itauba or makapádɨ (comino real;
unidentified), according to Fisi. Women must not be present during the preparation process. When a new
beam is introduced into the maloca, workers and participants who are neither the beam carriers or the
organizing couple must not look at it—particularly women. As my interlocutors explained to me, this
reflects the dangerousness of this anaconda, which ceases to jeopardize the celebrating group only after
its carriers have received coca paste and manicuera from the hosts. Participants can leave their hiding
spots or open their eyes only once they hear the carriers produce sounds with the beam inside the
maloca. This custom represents another example of the center’s efforts to familiarize elements
associated with the river sources in order to harness their forces. The specific prohibition against
women’s presence in the elaboration process highlights the phallic beam’s association with agnatic
ideology and the dangers that marital exchange, vital for reproduction, poses to patrilineal continuity.
During the dance, the guest—ideally, the maloquero’s brother-in-law—and his group only enter the
maloca after the host and his personnel have performed several songs to safeguard the beam (de la Hoz
Melo 2005, 77–79). These practices are rooted in M11, where the multiplying beam is threatened by
(and protected from) Green Tapir, a figure representing the dangers of affinal exchange (M22). During
the dance, the guests violently shake the multiplying beam with their feet, as if they were trying to break
it; the sound that the beam makes represents its ability to resist these aggressions.

395

Figure 23. Tañe offering tobacco to the guests who stomp on his multiplying beam
during a dance at his maloca. Photo taken from a video recorded by Levy Andoke Andoke

The Multiplying Tree Dance can serve as an occasion to give names to several adult members.
Emphasizing the multiplicity of name recipients appears essential to distinguish these relatively lowerstatus name givings from the higher prestige ones performed for newborn children, where individual
name givings are customary (the term “adults” also includes children past the age of individual naming).
While my interlocutors did not explicitly mention such a rule, my data reveals that the only newborn
children who receive names in this dance are the firstborn daughters of maloquero families or the
daughters of men trained to be maloqueros.
By contrast, firstborn sons of maloqueros or of men trained for this position are given a name in the
other red dance, River Turtle-Carrier Band (Bɨsokń Pádɨ; hereafter: Carrier Dance), with their sister or
cousin also likely to join them and be named in the dance. Like the Multiplying Tree, the Carrier Dance
also centers around a phallic element: Tofidei’s transformation of his anaconda enemies from downriver
into trees, islands, and rocks, by exposing them to his red-painted penis (M23, in Appendix 1). The
transformation of enemies to immobile beings, as discussed in Chapter 9, earned this ceremony the
name Transformation Dance (Tii Nni). This dance is associated with captaincy, among other things,
because the reddish mauritia-mixed caguana drank at it is perceived to be the transformed personnel of
Tofidei—whose own name means “Pounding Mauritia Juice”—that gave that captain more power to
defeat his enemies. The “singing ball” part is common to this and the other River Turtle dance—namely,
Bamboo—and addresses the prevention of dangers originating from the river mouth, and, to some
extent, related to commerce with Whites. For example,

396

[Like] Cacambra, Cacambra, Lady Cacambra (kaókamikn)
She is looking at her husband’s trail of goods (nikɒ yadohaio̰bɨ),
It is here, to her, that we came.

By providing tobacco liquid and manicuera to the singer, the host couple assures him that the maloquera
is not like the myth’s treacherous Lady Cacambra, thereby warding off potential harms from the river
mouth, similar to the ones that threatened Tofidei.
The guests prepare rods for this dance, painting them in different colors and adorning them with stripes
made from the bark of the bɨsokń tree (Castaño sp.), that give the dance its name. Unlike in other
dances, these rods are personal, and the dancers cannot exchange them with each other. One interlocutor
drew a direct connection between the dancing rods and Tofidei’s penis, an aspect also noted by
Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 107 n.39). This is also illustrated in the song with which the guest dancers
enter the dance, where they refer to the preparation of their rods by Toi (another name for Tofidei):
Are we the ones to have created this tree
That Toi painted,
The tree that you are asking us (ḭnntoni)?
We came here to your place.
He struck it, struck it for you.
Beautiful (hɵ́tuíkőkn), he struck it next to you.
The land [will make the sound] “nndo, nndo,”
The land [will make the sound] “tiya, tiya.”

In other songs, the guest dancers identify themselves as the “youth” (or workers) of Dónn̋ɵ Hɵpɵ, the
beneficial early morning rainbow-anaconda from the river source that bestowed the rods with their
colors. It thus appears that the guest group represents the phallic power that the host wishes to acquire,
and while I could not record a sufficient number of songs from the guest ḭtáu’fa parts, it seems his
dancers test the host’s readiness to possess this power. Finally, at the end of their last song in the early
morning, when they leave the maloca, the dancers hand their rods to the host. The host keeps these
objects, which symbolize the might from upriver and enhance his power to overcome disease and other
problems originating from downriver, until his guest reciprocates with another Carrier Dance.

397

Figure 24. A Carrier Dance rod outside Fisi’s maloca (Photo by the author)

Fisi and Nestor explained to me that Tofidei’s deed gave rise to a dangerous war ritual called the Spear
Dance (Fɨ’ɵfá Nni) after the weapon held by this hero. Therefore, to conduct a life-giving dance and
ensure the protection of the children, the organizer relies on another myth, M25, which is detailed in
Appendix 1. This myth recounts how Woodpecker managed to save the dangerous Stingray and carry
him on his back to Blazing Lake without the latter devouring him, by using a strong carrier crafted from
the bark of the bɨsokń tree. This earned this tree Stingray’s blessing for longevity and rejuvenation. For
this reason, naming a child in a dance associated with the bɨsokń tree is believed to ensure their health
and longevity. Babies were once carried in carriers elaborated from the bark of this tree, and I was told
that they are still carried in it for name-giving ceremonies in the Carrier Dance as well as other dances.
Decorating Tofidei’s “spears” with stripes crafted from bɨsokń bark shifts this dance from a context of
war to one of life and rejuvenation.

398

Figure 25. A Murui-Muina carrier band.
Source: Musée du quai Branly, Inventory no. 71.1975.26.65.

As noted earlier, the Carrier Dance shares the middle “singing ball” part with River Turtle-Bamboo
Dance (Hɨka Pádɨ), hereafter referred to as “Bamboo.” This white dance is based on the origin story of
dolphins (M22, Appendix 1; see also Chapter 9). The identity of the hero of this story, Green Tapir, also
hints at the commonality between this dance and Carrier Dance, since the latter is portrayed as Tofidei’s
brother. Like his brother, Green Tapir confronts aggressive aquatic beings from downriver. In the longer
version of the myth, as narrated by Fisi, after Green Tapir transforms his wife and her brother into
dolphins and sends them to Egret of the River Mouth, his three sons join their mother downriver, while
Green Tapir marries another woman. When his sons learn that he organizes a dance with her, they
become upset, saying, “Our father never held a dance when he lived with our mother!” and go upriver to
avenge their mother’s expulsion, equipped with a club. However, when they arrive at their father’s
maloca, the latter appeases them, together with his new wife, by providing them with coca powder,
tobacco paste, manicuera, peanuts, and mocambo (Theobroma bicolor) seeds. He manages to take away
their club, and they return to the river mouth without having caused any damage.
The Bamboo Dance is specifically seen as a defense against problems, illnesses, accidents, and conflicts
that originate from Whites, who are associated with dolphins, as well as their goods, instruments, and
weapons. However, in contrast with the aggressive approach employed by Tofidei and reenacted in the
Carrier Dance, the Bamboo Dance reenacts Green Tapir’s strategy to neutralize the dangers from that

399

direction by sharing substances with it. In other words, this dance seeks to impose reciprocal exchange
on the incestuous entities of the river mouth. Reciprocity is thus key to this dance, with the guest being
obligated to organize another such dance to invite his former host. Control over restraining anger and
managing sexuality among dance organizers is essential to steer clear of the same self-predatory
tendencies that characterize the river mouth. Conversely, a failure to observe these behavioral rules
would lead to envy among group members regarding externally manufactured goods, conflicts involving
firearms, accidents involving machines and metal tools, and seduction by dolphins in human guise who
frequent this dance.
The difference between the aggressiveness of the red specialization and the more diplomatic attitude of
the white one can be illustrated by examining the dance instruments employed in the two River Turtle
Dances. In these dances, individuals affiliated with the red specialization dance with balso [kóo;
Ochroma pyramidale?] rods, while white dancers use bamboo (hɨka) canes. But why is bamboo used in
this context? In an episode from M22, shared with me by Fisi and Nestor on another occasion, Green
Tapir’s former wife and her brother return after their expulsion to seek revenge on Green Tapir’s people.
They appear well-groomed with face and body paint and attempt to cause harm by seducing human
beings into having sexual intercourse with them. The sister tries to attract men’s attention through her
painted gourd vessel (clearly an allusion to her genitals), but all the men she encounters resist her
advances. On the other hand, the brother manages to seduce one woman, who falls in love with his
charms and the beautifully painted bamboo cane with which he strikes the ground as he walks. After
sleeping with him, the woman becomes ill with a high fever, but her father manages to heal her. As
Nestor and Fisi explained to me, by dancing with the bamboo cane in the dance and striking it on the
ground, the dancers essentially name the wrongdoers from downriver, putting them to shame and
making it clear that they are not welcome at that maloca, where the origin stories and cures against their
harms are known. In other words, while the rods of the red dancers symbolize Tofidei’s penis and spear,
with which he petrified his enemies, the white dancers exhibit a more intricate strategy. To some extent,
they identify with their enemies by using the instrument through which harm was inflicted on
humankind, but they use it to ward off harm. This complexity is also tied to the moral ambiguity of

400

Green Tapir, to whom Fisi attributed, on other occasions, the seduction of women and the subsequent
infliction of fatal internal bleeding through a bamboo cane.136
Another dance that belongs to white specialization is the Head Dance (Ḭtai), which involves a dialogue
with guardian spirits of forest animals to prevent a transformation of humans into nonhumans, similar to
the one narrated in M18 (Appendix 1, see Chapter 9). The preferred game for this dance is white-lipped
peccaries that have been caught in a collective expedition using net casting, much like in that myth. It is
also essential to adequately compensate the hunters, and through them, the owner-persons of peccaries,
to prevent similar damages to the maloca and gardens as were inflicted by the peccary herd in the story.
As demonstrated in the Head song above, providing offerings to the singers helps prevent the
transformation of members of the human group into animals through disease and other misfortunes.
The Head Dance is also closely related to the manguaré monoxylic drums (ku’dɨ), whose origin is
narrated in a M26, a myth recorded by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 84–90) and summarized in
Appendix 1. This myth describes events following the flood caused by the eagle’s damming of the river
with its outspread wings. After the floodwaters receded, the people who remained on the parched earth
kept playing the síiru flute made from the eagle bone. These people, who should now be understood as
animals due to their retreat below the earth once they were subjected to a predatory gaze, were led by
Pineapple (Tomirepa; or “Pineapple Anaconda,” Tomḭ Hɵpɵ), whose son had the flute as his toy. The
ocelots of the stars descended to earth and stole the flute. When Pineapple failed to retrieve it by
shooting arrows to the stars, the sick Péífirú volunteered to ascend and recover the instrument. After
negotiating with Nénéfi, the captain of the stars, Péífirú received the manguaré and healing herbs to aid
his group’s recovery from a devastating flood. Unfortunately, the manguaré shattered as it fell to Earth,
transforming into various animals and a small, nocturnal version of itself. To rectify this, Nénéfi
dispatched his men with the correct manguaré to Earth. Its arrival and installation in Pineapple’s maloca
were marked by a Head Dance.

136

Within this context, it is also tempting to engage in “thinking through tubes,” as suggested by S. Hugh-Jones (2019c).
Unlike the solid rods used by the red dancers, the bamboo cane is a hollow tube (it can also be used as a flute, referred to as
hɨka). Being a tube, it represents a more complex form than the univocal rod, masculine from the outside and feminine from
the inside. When used as a weapon, in the form of a blowpipe, a tube demands calmness, patience, and self-control—the
virtues associated with the white specialization—instead of the explosive violence associated with killing using a spear (idem
2019a, 109).

401

The manguaré is thus the instrument of game animals granted to them by predatory entities—the star
ocelots, led by the eagle god Nénéfi—to increase in numbers, as it bestows aggressive capacities upon
them as well. This aggressive capacity is the one demonstrated by Ka’ákɵpidɨ, who took the hunters
eyes out in M18—a predatory episode that serves as the starting point of the negotiation and exchange
with nonhuman entities in the Head Dance. Indeed, the two main nonhuman owner-persons of this
dance, to whom offerings are provided, are Ka’ákɵpidɨ (or, in his other name, Dó’ákɵidɨ, meaning “Eye
Extractor”) and Péífirú (or Pineapple—see the footnotes accompanying M26 in Appendix 1), whose
vulnerable men, the game animals, gained the predatory capacity that has led humans to want to engage
in negotiations with them.
The Fausíya Dance (an Andoque word, related to the tyrannidae species faukuya) is the one about which
I possess the least information. Although it is widely associated with the white specialization, Fisi
claims that it is “less white” than the Head or Bamboo Dances. He classifies it as “sort of yellow,”
falling midway between the two specializations because it is rooted in a dance during which the birds
received their current colors from the full range of color palette. Similar to the Peach Palm Dance, I
attribute the defiance of the red-white classification by the Fausíya to its apparent relatively recent
introduction into the Andoque ritual repertoire. In the Fausíya case, it seems to be an elaboration by
Yiñékɒ to restore a sense of peace to the territory after the genocide (Landaburu 1993, 156), with a large
dependence on the mythology of the Head Dance and a specific indication to be celebrated only at
generational intervals. The origin myth of the Fausíya (M27), as recorded by Landaburu and Pineda
(1984, 84–85) and narrated here with additional details provided by my interlocutors, reflects a
transformation of the manguaré myth (M26), which explains its classification as a white dance. After the
War of the Speaking Tree, Nénéfi proposed his brother Pineapple to conduct the Fausíya Dance, which
he had learned from their father, Training Anaconda (Yitai Hɵpɵ), in order to rectify everything and
establish order (hɵ́ikai). However, Pineapple refused the offer. Subsequently, Nénéfi climbed to the sky
with his sister, Lady Dance Rattle (Paidikn), whom he transformed into manguaré drums by hanging her
upside down, so that her breasts become the two drums. Playing these drums, he ordered his sister to
summon her brothers, the faukuya birds, to sing and dance. When Pineapple, who had remained on
Earth, heard these sounds from above, he regretted rejecting this dance, and set off for Nénéfi’s abode,
to obtain the manguaré—this time, an instrument whose main function is to promote peaceful existence.
In the Fausiya dance, both children and adults can be given names or have their names changed. The
dance participants don the feathers of the faukuya bird as ornaments. The reader may recall that in M18,
402

the origin of the Head Dance, the peccary band ascends to Faukuyadefɵ, the forest of these birds. This
detail represents another association between the two dances and the affinal connotations of both, as
peccaries and birds for feather ornaments are two classes of animals to which brothers-in-law can
transform in Amerindian mythology, representing, according to Lévi-Strauss, either “nature” or
“culture,” respectively (1964, 100–102). I will return to the connection between this dance and the Head
Dance below.
Lastly, the Armadillo Dance (Féíkɵ), categorized as white as well, is performed to name and protect
children. It is also known as Fern Dance (Ti’ñḛdɨ Nni) after a herb of the Pteridaceae family used during
this ceremony for the child’s defense, alongside other protective measures, such as a(n unidentified)
plant referred to as ant cotton (poso̰), genipa body paint, the black bakʉdʉ́kn paint for teeth protection,
and a special carrier elaborated from a higuerón tree (Estrada Añokazi 2017, 256). According to Estrada,
the guests bring only small game animals to this dance that do not pose risks to children, unlike large
game (ibid, ibid).
The dance draws on a version of M20 (see Appendix 1), which, as shared with me by Fisi (M28,
2/1/19), concerns only one seduced woman without including her sister, but refers also to her giving
birth, specifying that the eventual healing and protection primarily applies to her child. In this version,
Tatoañei’s jaguar son seduces Shadow Egg’s daughter, Hummingbird, drawing her to the site where he
burns plants for salt production in a bid to burn her as well. After his mother instructs the woman to flee
from her voracious son, the woman first finds shelter in Acouchi’s hole in a tree trunk and then under
Anaconda’s chest. While Anaconda was hiding the woman, he impregnated her, and when the jaguar
came looking for her, threatening to eat her accomplice, Anaconda laughed at him, suggesting that he
can devour the jaguar instead. After the woman finally finds shelter under Kingfisher’s wing and goes
underwater with him as he dives, she gives birth to a certain pintadillo fish along with the fern, which is
the defense with which Anaconda has equipped his son. Hummingbird safeguards her son with the fern
and ant cotton, and, thus, she is the owner-person of the Armadillo Dance.137
The Armadillo Dance safeguards both the boy or girl named in it and all the other children brought to it,
imbuing them with the cool principle, stemming from the anaconda, which is essential for warding off
the forest’s hot diseases that are so dangerous for children in their early years. While this defense is
This story does not explain why this ceremony is associated with the armadillo. I was succinctly told that this name owes
to the physical resemblance between this animal and the ornaments on the rods employed for dancing at this ceremony.

137

403

crucial, the children named in this dance do not belong to a maloquero family and are generally not
destined to become maloqueros, as this dance is considered the most ordinary of the dances associated
with a ritual specialization and does not involve the preliminary ritual of caguana distribution. Andoque
members explain that a new father who wishes to name his child in this dance must approach a
maloquero and ask him to organize this dance for him, committing to providing the necessary foodstuffs
and labor, and ideally inviting his brother-in-law as a guest.
Many of the songs of this dance, as they were shared with me, express criticism of the female host, who
is the mother of the named child. For instance:
Her husband ate with her.
It’s [The game animal] gone, [its] old age (yodá), go wash it away!
She was not dirty (fḭḭ́ kó),
She became old because of her husband.
[Previously, her beauty] could make one cry (mnḛḭ).
[Now] she looks like the guan bird (sói) with her grey hair.
She looks like the saki monkey’s (pɵdɵdɵ; Pithecia sp.) son.
She was not dirty,
She became old because of her husband.
[Previously, her beauty] could make one cry.
Like her lovers (saámḭe),
The oriole (bi’koié; Icterus chrysater) people,
They are looking up,
So come here, hide here, I say.

Providing tobacco and manicuera to the singers reassures them of the mother’s humanity and correct
behavior, thereby deterring any attempts by nonhuman entities to prey on her and, particularly, her
newborn child.
As noted earlier, while the red ritual specialization is held in high esteem by almost all my Andoque
interlocutors, the white one is more ambiguous. Certain interlocutors told me that both specializations
are necessary, acknowledging that sometimes an aggressive position is needed, and at other times—a
reconciliatory one. Fisi says that the white specialization is equally important as the red one but
perceives the white dances as “sad” due to the episode from M26 (in Appendix 1), where Pineapple’s
personnel abandon him, his maloca, his manguaré drums, and the Head rituals he was celebrating, once
the orphans craft their own “red” drums and multiplying beam. In one conversation, Fisi even distanced

404

Yiñéko, who organized white dances, from this specialization, saying in a scornful tone, “My father
never got into this pó’fiɵ business (mi papá nunca se metió en ese pó’fiɵ).” Tañe is the most radical
speaker against the white specialization, claiming that he wants nothing to do with it. Once, when I
asked him why he, who had been given a name in the white Armadillo Dance, later named his three sons
in red dances, he said: “I’m afraid of the origin stories of animals (nacimiento de animales), I’m human
(soy gente), not an animal. In the dances of Head and River Turtle[-Bamboo] you [the maloquero]
receive ambíl from the animals, and it makes me sick (me da asco).”
As in Tañe’s statement, the contempt, suspicion, and fear that Andoque members express toward the
white specialization are primarily focused on the Head and Bamboo Dances. Fisi’s sister Irene, who was
given a name in the white Fausíya Dance claimed that she is appalled by the Head Dance, as did several
other interlocutors. Even several people who were named in this dance or have organized it nevertheless
distance themselves from it, assuring that the version in which they have been involved is the safer,
more benign one, as it appears that there exist several categories of the Head Dance. However, since my
interlocutors were unwilling to delve into this dangerous conversation topic, I possess no information on
the differences between the Head categories, besides a comment by Raquel, who was named in this
dance, and which explains some of people’s contemporary disdain toward it, that the anthropophagous
ritual was also among these categories.
People’s ambivalence toward the white specialization also translates to a decline in the frequency of
white dances, and, most notably, a decline in the number of white name givings, in comparison with red
ones.
Birth Decade

Red

White

1930–1949
1950–1959
1960–1969
1970–1979
1980–1989
1990–1999
2000–2009
2010–2019

1
0
2
5
2
2
1
2

5
26
3
1
2
0
2
0

White (Excluding
Armadillo and “adult”
Fausíya)
3
2
0
0
0
0
1
0

Table 11. Name giving by ritual specialization, 1930–2019 (cf. Appendix 4)

White name givings have decreased since the 1960s, while red name givings reached their peak in the
1970s and maintained a relative stability in smaller numbers since the 1980s, consistently surpassing

405

white ones almost continuously since that decade. This contrast is even more evident if we exclude
name givings in the Armadillo Dance and the 19 individuals who were given a name as adults in one
Fausíya Dance in the 1950s, as these name givings carry little prestige and these individuals are not
trained to become maloqueros or organize the main Andoque dances. By counting as “white” the
children given a name in Head or Fausíya Dances, we witness the near disappearance of white namings
since the 1960s, with only one girl given a name in the Head ritual in the past twenty years. Even as the
Andoque conduct fewer ceremonial dances in recent decades, they prefer the organization of red dances
and naming children in them over white dances.
Another indicator highlighting the predominance of the red specialization is the number of maloqueros
subscribing to each specialization since the 1930s, who have continued beyond their initial maloca. Six
maloqueros have predominantly engaged in red dances, with five of them building more than one
maloca throughout their lifetime. By contrast, among the four maloqueros engaging in white dances,
only one continued beyond his first maloca. The only maloquero to have completed a white ritual cycle
that included name giving to his two elder daughters, demonstrated a strong inclination towards red
rituals in the final years of his maloca and even expressed a desire to name his firstborn male son in a
red dance. There were two white malocas and three red ones when I arrived in the Andoque territory in
2018, and as of September 2023, there are two red malocas and one white maloca. However, the latter
maloca is relatively inactive, remote, and considered marginal by most members, bearing only a loose
association with the white specialization, as its owner was named in the mass name-giving ceremony of
the Fausíya Dance in the 1950s, rather than in an exclusive manner in this dance or Head.
To understand the rise of the red specialization and the decline of the white one, we need to delve deeper
into the different ways of engaging with human and nonhuman entities reflected by each tutelary dance.
To achieve this, we must uncover the underlying correspondence between the two ceremonial
specializations and birth order. This, in turn, requires a comparative analysis with similar systems of
ritual prerogatives among other People of the Center. Certainly, the themes and instruments of the
Andoque dances exhibit notable similarities with dances celebrated by other People of the Center
(Gasché 2009; Echeverri 2022, 285–305). Concerning tutelary dances, however, Echeverri argues for
Andoque singularity due to the presence of two ritual specializations among them, in contrast with three

406

or four such specializations among neighboring peoples (2022, 305).138 However, I propose viewing the
Andoque specializations as a variation of the underlying logic found in the Murui-Muina and Miraña
systems, where ritual prerogatives are linked to birth order.
The Murui-Muina and Miraña models, as documented by ethnographers such as Gasché, García, and
Karadimas, describe the ideal situation, whose limited materialization in practice in present times has
undoubtedly been influenced by the demographic upheaval of the rubber genocide. Among the MuruiMuina, a maloquero’s firstborn son holds the privilege to create a dancing beam and conduct the Yadiko
ceremony to communicate with the Creator Father. The second or third son, depending on whose model
(Gasché or García), can perform the Zɨkɨi Dance for managing relations with forest animals or the
Menizaɨ River Turtle Dance, involving negotiation with aquatic beings. The fourth son celebrates the
Yuakɨ Fruit Dance (García 2018, 133–34; Gasché 2009, 15–18). The hierarchical logic also reflects the
notion of privilege accumulation, where a maloquero can perform not only the dance associated with his
birth order but also those of his younger brothers. Therefore, the Fruit Dance can be performed by any
maloquero, similar to the Andoque’s perception of this and other variants of the Opossum Dance as the
basis of any ceremonial career. In Gasché’s account, the second son (and, therefore, also the firstborn)
can create a pair of manguaré drums associated with the Zɨkɨi Dance (2009, 15–16). The Murui-Muina
model also corresponds, to some extent, to the Miraña ritual system. In this system, a maloquero’s
firstborn son holds the privilege to inaugurate a maloca with the dance beam ceremony; the second son
celebrates the Tšákómɨ nomination dance, and the third son and his younger brothers can perform the
carrying band ceremony (Pítšópa) to name a newborn child and celebrate the harvest of seasonal fruits
(Karadimas 2005, 38–40).
Five of the Andoque red and white dances mentioned above mirror these Murui-Muina and Miraña
ritual prerogatives. Similar to the firstborn ceremonies in both groups, the Multiplying Tree Dance
centers around a dance beam associated with ancestry and promoting demographic growth, which holds
a higher rank than the manguaré drums associated with the Head Dance. The latter dance is also linked
to forest animals, akin to the Murui-Muina Zɨkɨi, while the two River Turtle Dances (Bamboo and
Carrier) parallel the Menizaɨ in their association with aquatic beings. Lastly, the Armadillo Dance is
dedicated to name giving for babies in a special carrying band, resembling the Miraña’s Pítšópa.

It should be noted that Echeverri’s comparison largely draws on Estrada Añokazi’s (2018) research among the Andoque,
whose data diverges, in several cases, from the analysis put forward in this chapter.
138

407

Furthermore, an analysis of Andoque naming ceremonies since the 1930s demonstrates a certain
correspondence between the tutelary dances where names have been given and the birth order of the
named individual. In the Andoque case, the parent’s maloquero or non-maloquero status is also relevant,
because also non-maloquero children can be given a name in the Armadillo Dance. Based on my data,
firstborn daughters of maloqueros or individuals trained to be maloqueros are typically given names in
the Multiplying Tree Dance, while firstborn sons of such individuals receive names in the red Carrier
Dance which is closely connected with Multiplying Tree, and which grants these individuals the
authority to create the multiplying beam. The fact that the Andoque associate primogeniture, and not the
laterborn son, with a river dance, differs from the Murui-Muina model, and I will return to it below,
alongside the notable exception found in the sole tutelary dance where naming is not permitted. This
dance, Bamboo, is also connected with aquatic life, akin to the Murui-Muina’s Menizaɨ. Individuals
named in other white dances are eligible to hold Bamboo as well. Second-born sons of maloqueros
receive names in the Head or Fausíya Dances, with the latter, which has no equivalent among
neighboring peoples, seeming to be a derivative of the Head Dance and its associated traditions. Finally,
firstborn sons of non-maloquero men, who are considered the younger brothers of their respective clan
captains, can receive a name in an Armadillo Dance and are likewise classified as white.
Against this backdrop, I propose the following hypothesis: in the past, the Andoque also operated within
a quadripolar system, characterized by an ideal correlation between ritual prerogatives and the birth
order of a maloquero’s four sons. In this system, the firstborn son held the right to celebrate the
Multiplying Tree Dance and construct the corresponding beam; the second son could craft a manguaré
and organize the Head Dance; the third son had the privilege of celebrating a River Turtle Dance, which
included name-giving a name-giving ceremony; and the fourth son was responsible for the Armadillo
Dance, a ritual focused solely on protecting children. As seen in Table 12. this reconstructed system
resembled those of neighboring peoples:

408

Miraña
(Karadimas 2005)

Murui-Muina
(Gasché 2009)

Murui-Muina
(García 2019)

First Born Son

Dance Beam

Dance Beam

Dance Beam

Second Born Son

Name Giving

Forest Animals,
Manguaré Drums

Aquatic Animals

Third Born Son

Carrying Band and
Fruits

Aquatic Animals

Forest Animals

Fruits

Fruits

Fourth Born Son

Andoque
Dance Beam
(Multiplying Tree)
Forest Animals,
Manguaré Drums
(Head)
Aquatic Animals
(Bamboo)
Carrying Band
(Armadillo)

Table 12. Ritual prerogatives and birth order among the People of the Center

However, I suggest that these four specializations gradually gravitated into a dual division, consolidating
into two career paths—the red career, consisting of ceremonies centered on patrilineal continuity and led
by the firstborn son, and the white career, encompassing the specializations of the three other brothers
and primarily focused on managing relations with both real and potential affinal relatives. I will
substantiate and elaborate on my argument through the five following points.
First, Andoque members’ practice of referring to their clan captain as “elder brother” highlights the
connection between primogeniture and patrilineal identity, where the elder brother maintains a
privileged connection with the father and the clan’s origin and core, which he mediates for his younger
brothers and subordinates. The link between the red specialization and primogeniture is also suggested
by the former’s name, peɒɵsí, which shares the concept of “essence” (ɵsí) with the term for “elder
brother,” ḭhaǵɵsí, while the younger sibling is perceived as the “final” person (ḭɒi), what remains after
their elder. This idea finds illustration in the story of the war between Sun and Moon. These two
brothers, who are associated with the red and white specializations emerged from the same dove egg
(Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 45). Sun, the elder brother, emerged from the neatly defined yolk, while
the younger Moon represents the egg white—the disorganized, amorphic matter surrounding the yolk.
As the guardian of his group’s essence, the elder brother holds the privilege of crafting the material
representation of its phallus, fertilizing the group, and boosting its population through the Multiplying
Tree Dance. Similarly to equivalent dances among neighboring peoples, this dance symbolizes the
firstborn’s identification with the father, maintaining the connection with the ancestors (Gasché 2009,
15; Urbina Rangel 2010, 39). While it is understandable that following the rubber genocide, as part of
the Andoque’s desire to recover demographically, they would hold in greater esteem this dance and
related practices aimed at consolidating the essence of their identity and ensuring its continuity, what
remains to be explained is their contempt and suspicion toward the dances that are classified as white.

409

Second, an important step in the bipolarization of the Andoque ceremonial system appears to be the
absorption of the name giving component of the river-related dance into the elder brother’s ritual
specialization. The identity between the “singing ball” parts of both Carrier and Bamboo Dances points
to their common origin, as one River Turtle Dance for managing relations with aquatic entities and other
agents associated with the river and the river mouth, such as Whites.139 However, I suggest that as
exchange with the latter became more central to the Andoque’s lives and economy, the more powerful
and prestigious maloqueros of the Multiplying Tree career appropriated the river ceremony. They did
this by duplicating the River Turtle dance and adding the spear-rod dances, reflecting a more aggressive
attitude toward riverine agents. Furthermore, they inserted the “carrier band” component to name their
own sons, destined for leadership, instead of naming them in the Multiplying Tree Dance, and at the
expense of the children of their younger brothers, who retained an impoverished version of the River
Turtle Dance. Evidence of this impoverishment of the younger brother’s dance is expressed through the
mythical register in M8 (see Appendix 1), where a captain loses his son after receiving jaguar fangs as
game in a Bamboo Dance (see also Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 122–23).140 For this reason, the
Bamboo Dance is today considered infelicitous for children and suitable only for old, childless
maloqueros.
In the Bamboo Dance, the “river turtle” component is also associated with the failure of that maloquero
and his genealogical discontinuity. When I asked Fisi upon his narration the Bamboo Dance’s origin
myth why this dance alludes to this animal, he explained to me that when the jaguar was burned in that
mythic dance, one bone turned into a bamboo stick, another became another type of flute, and his eye
popped out, transforming into a beetle which, during that period, was called pádɨ—the same word used
today to refer to river turtles (an episode resembling M16). By contrast, the way the “river turtle”
component was integrated into the traditions of the Carrier Dance reflects an association with the red
specialization and its emphasis on patrilineal continuity. Fisi explained to me that in Blazing Lake,
where Woodpecker carried Stingray in M25, the river turtles saw dragonflies dancing the Multiplying
Tree up high on the trees, using the root of the açai palm as their beam. The river turtles called the
dragonflies to descend and dance a River Turtle-Carrier Band with them, which the dragonflies did, and

139
The Yucuna myth on the war of the hero Majnori with his fish brothers-in-law bridges some of the differences between
M22 and M23 (van der Hammen 1992, 251–52). It is possible that the original River Turtle Dance was associated with such a
myth, from which the two stories later diverged.
140
This story also reflects the association between the white specialization and the manguaré, because this captain’s anger
leads him to hang his wife and use her two breasts as drums.

410

they all danced with rods decorated with the bark of the bɨsokń tree, whose benefits for child protection
are here explained through its resemblance to the açai, as it does not heat up or die. The river turtle is
thus an important owner-person of this dance because this species was the first to dance it with
ornamented rods, as people do today, instead of using Tofidei’s simple spears, thereby turning it into a
life-giving ritual. By associating the bɨsokń tree with the Multiplying Tree Dance and the açai, which
served as the proto-multiplying beam, this episode establishes the link between the River Turtle Dance
and the red specialization, essential for justifying the appropriation of the former’s name giving
component by the latter.
Third, it is important to address another distinction between the Andoque’s dual specializations and the
Murui-Muina model: the existence of the Fausíya Dance, which does not have any equivalent
throughout the region. As previously mentioned, this ceremony appears to be a derivative of the Head
Dance. I suggest that Yiñékɒ foregrounded this dance as an alternative to Head’s conception of dynamic
and relatively symmetrical exchange between different categories of predator and prey. In this
alternative, the exchange is unidirectional, with the agency of game animals enhanced through the
capacities bestowed upon them by celestial predators, and its practice is restricted— once a generation,
as I was informed. It is possible that the infrequency of this dance is intended to ensure a particular
allegorical interpretation by its participants, one that M27 invites listeners to consider through the
allusion to the flood. In this interpretation, game animals do not represent themselves, and the powerful
rhythm bestowed upon them by the stars does not pose a threat to humans. Instead, these vulnerable
animals symbolize post-diluvian humanity—or, in the case of the Andoque, the survivors of genocide—
and the musical instrument they receive signifies the empowerment of human victims.
The only children who received a name in a prestigious manner in a Fausíya Dance—in contrast to mass
name-givings or changes for other children and adults on another occasion—were Yiñékɒ’s second male
son Rodolfo and his elder sister Irene, with Rodolfo being the primary name recipient. I propose that,
unable to name this son in the red Carrier Dance (as he was not his firstborn)141 and unwilling to name
him in a Head Dance for a similar aversion toward the white specialization as the one discussed below,
Yiñékɒ used the Fausíya as a “white” alternative to Head for naming second-born children.

My interlocutors, including Fisi, were unable to explain why Yiñékɒ had not named his eldest son, Fisi, in the Carrier
Dance or any other dance. Although I do not have the exact year when Yiñékɒ built his first maloca, I presume that he did not
name Fisi in a dance either because he did not possess a maloca at that period, or because he did not yet feel confident in his
ability to perform complicated dances like Carrier.

141

411

Fourth, while the red specialization focuses on maintaining patrilineal continuity, the central white
dances—namely, Head and Bamboo—revolve around affinal exchange and the familiarization of such
non-kin to counter hostilities by them. In these two ceremonies, the guests, who are ideally the host’s
real affines, serve as intermediaries with nonhuman potential affines, and providing them with
familiarizing foodstuffs and ritual substances functions to appease and familiarize the masters of forest
animals and of the river and aquatic beings. The etiological myths of both dances (M18 and M22)
narrate the failed attempt to celebrate a dance which is the blueprint of the one whose origin the myth
recounts, a failure connected to the inappropriate behavior of the host’s brothers-in-law. In M18, the
group of overhunting affines arrive at the maloca as peccaries and sows disorder, while in M22, Pretty
expresses his refusal to participate in reciprocal exchange with his brother-in-law by sleeping with his
own sister and Green Tapir’s wife. To repair these damaged relations with affinal relatives and prevent
further harms by them, both dances involve commensality with sylvan and aquatic nonhuman affines.142
Tellingly, although Andoque members often translate the term for the white specialization, pó’fiɵ, as
“peace” (paz), a more exact translation would hint at notions of clarity or gaze indicated by the root pó’.
This root is also shared with the kinship term “brother-in-law” (pókn), which suggests a possible
association between the two terms (Jon Landaburu, pers. comm., November 2023). This possible
association may revolve around the notion of symmetry—the symmetrical exchange in the Head and
Bamboo Dances, and the symmetry underlying relations between brothers-in-law, in contrast with the
asymmetrical relations between father and son and between father-in-law and son-in-law.
The tension that the Andoque acknowledge between affinal exchange and agnatic ideology is best
illustrated in M11, where Green Tapir—who, in the context of the Bamboo Dance, embodies the failure
of the exchange with his wife’s family—tries to break the multiplying beam. This episode captures the
risk that exogamy poses to patrilineal continuity. By contrast, the Multiplying Tree Dance is associated
with the dance inaugurated by Green Tapir’s brother, Tofidei—one narrator even referred to him as
Green Tapir’s elder brother—who reflects an endogamous ideal by marrying his own sister after a
similar matrimonial failure.
Finally, in contrast with the two central and powerful white dances, the less prestigious Armadillo
Dance is primarily concerned with defending human group members from engaging in commensality

M8 likewise describes lack of reciprocity between affines during a Bamboo Dance, but here it is the host, not guest, who
fails to reciprocate the game provided to him (see Appendix 1).

142

412

(and coupling) with potential nonhuman affines, rather than appeasing them through such commensality.
While this dance bears certain resemblances to the Miraña’s name giving ceremony linked with
ultimogeniture, it appears that if it was indeed associated with a specific birth order, it dissociated from
this model and became identified with a non-maloquero status. Unlike the relational orientation of
affinal exchange characterizing the Head and Bamboo Dances, in its non-maloquero position, the
Armadillo Dance reflects the submission of ordinary members’ to the maloquero. They should approach
the maloquero to name their child in this dance, symbolizing allegiance to the patrilineal authority he
represents, and their desire to benefit from the protection that his patrilineally-transmitted traditions can
provide to their newborn child. In the terms of M28, they seek the maloquero’s enhanced paternity to
shield their child from the affinal world—similar to how the anaconda saved the child by imposing its
paternity over the jaguar’s.143
The distinct relational orientations of the red dances, on the one hand, and of the two central white
dances, Head and Bamboo, on the other, represent a variation of the Amazonian division between two
ideal types of shamanism, termed vertical and horizontal shamanism by S. Hugh-Jones (1994). In HughJones’ definition, vertical shamanism relies on esoteric knowledge transmitted within a small elite,
whereas horizontal shamanism is accessible to individuals outside the political elites and involves
personalized and corporal experiences of trance and possession. In the Northwest Amazonian context
that Hugh-Jones focused on, where Tukanoan and Arawakan-speaking clans, or sibs, emphasize agnatic
descent and hierarchy while also striving for symmetrical marital exchange, this duality is observed in
the distinction between the ~kubu and payé. The ~kubu relies on patrilineally-transmitted knowledge,
gains further authority with age, and is responsible for communication with the ancestor. His position
often converges with leadership, and he practices his powers within the maloca for the benefit of the
wider community, with rituals associated with forest fruits and gathering. By contrast, the payé relies on
personal experience and physical transmission of knowledge. He represents youth and holds a lower
status, communicating with animals, affines, and enemies outside the house for the benefit of the
specific individuals seeking his services. His rituals are associated with venatic activities and warfare,
aspiring for reciprocal exchange with spirits.

Among the Miraña, the fern, whose use in the name-giving dance parallels its employment in the Andoque’s Armadillo
Dance, is associated with the clan’s past generations, thereby symbolizing patrilineal continuity (Karadimas 2005b, 335–36).
This may account for Yiñékɒ’s use of the fern component of the Armadillo Dance, in which Tañe was named, to shift the
latter’s ritual specialization from the white to the red one, associated with a strong patrilineal identity (see Chapter 10).
143

413

The Andoque division between the red and white specializations mirrors some dimensions of the duality
between vertical and horizontal shamanism. Akin to vertical shamanism, the red specialization is
associated with leadership and seniority, and centers around patrilineal continuity. Furthermore, the
creation and recreation of forest trees as a defensive measure in M23 and Carrier Dance resonates with
the Tukanoan-Arawakan link between this type of shamanism and the forest’s growth. On the contrary,
the two main dances of the white specialization bear resemblance to the horizontal shamanism ideal,
marked by lower status and association with juniority. They prioritize reciprocal exchange with affines
and aim to navigate relations with sylvan and aquatic animals. I also put forth the hypothesis that the
white specialization represents an attempt to institutionalize horizontal shamanic powers in order to
contain them within the socially acceptable borders of the maloca. This hypothesis is based on several
similarities between this specialization and the more individualistic roles of healer and sorcerer, which
are the most representative of the horizontal type. It is thus possible that the moral ambiguity
characterizing these roles contributes to the ambivalence surrounding the white specialization.
The aversion expressed by Andoque members toward the white specialization, particularly the Head and
Bamboo dances, bears a resemblance to their disinclination toward sorcerers and even healers, who are
morally ambiguous, drawing on Animal Stories and maintaining a close relationship with nonhuman
entities that they may also exploit to inflict harm on others. Here we should also recall the apparent
continuum mentioned above, which existed before the genocide, between cannibal dances— now
regarded as diabólicos and a clear expression of commensality with nonhuman predators at the expense
of human sociality for acquiring sorcery and healing skills—and the Head Dance. Yinñéfɵkn from the
survivors’ generation, who was reportedly a healer and a sorcerer, also belonged to the white
specialization. More specifically, he was associated with the Bamboo Dance, which he allegedly
organized as part of his ongoing dialogue and exchange with dolphins and other malevolent entities.
César from that generation is also depicted today as a healer and a practitioner of the Head and other
white dances. Joselito from that generation represents an interesting case, because he was a healer and is
also described today by many members as a sorcerer, who chose to change his own name and name
several of his sons in the mass naming of the white Fausíya Dance organized by “his elder brother”
Yiñékɒ before the event that created the schism between these two Eagle lineages—namely, Joselito’s
son death. However, when Joselito constructed his own maloca years after that event, he chose to
inaugurate it with the red River Turtle-Carrier Band Dance associated with primogeniture, thus signaling
his breaking away with Yiñékɒ’s authority. Today, the elder who is the most associated with the white
414

specialization is also considered a healer, with people expressing suspicions about sorcery actions he
may have undertaken.
However, my interlocutors also distinguish between sorcerers and healers on the one hand, and the white
specialization on the other. While healers and especially sorcerers are depicted as asocial individuals
who stereotypically live alone, without a wife and children, practicing their lore in their remote forest
cabin, the practitioners of the white specialization, like any other captain, can and should construct
malocas, organize people for work and hold dances for the benefit of the wider group.
In this context, it is interesting to note the correlation between sorcery and healing, younger birth order,
and negative social evaluation among the Bora, where, unlike the Murui-Muina and Miraña, a system of
correspondences between ritual prerogatives and birth order has not been observed. Among the Bora, a
maloquero’s firstborn son and daughter inherit “beautiful” names, with the son also inheriting the
father’s ritual specialization and the expectation to construct a maloca and serve as captain. By contrast,
the maloquero’s second-born son and daughter inherit “ugly” names. This son also typically assumes a
trickster position, both protecting and insulting his elder brother, and tends to practice healing and
sorcery, both of which assumes contact with animals (Lucas 2019, 172; on beautiful and ugly names
among the Miraña, see Karadimas 2005, 38–39). This negative evaluation of younger siblings and their
inclination for horizontal shamanic practices is reminiscent of the Andoque’s lower regard for the white
specialization. However, in the Andoque case, the negative evaluation of the ritual specialization that is
continuous with sorcery/healing is not as formalized as among the Bora. The Andoque’s informal
negative evaluation of the white specialization seems to rest on people’s inferences about the risks
surrounding white dances. Similar to the exchange with powerful nonhuman entities in sorcery and
healing, white maloqueros may be unable to control the dangerous exchange with nonhumans,
potentially leading to their familiarization by these entities instead of them familiarizing the latter.
By contrast, the more aggressive stance of the red specialization correlates with a stronger emphasis on
patrilineal descent and identity, a higher tendency for asymmetry in exchange with nonhuman entities,
and a degradation of their agency—like Tofidei’s petrification of his enemies in M23—which renders
the inversion potential inherent in the logic of familiarizing predation less likely. Foregrounding the
kinship and inter-species dimensions of the Andoque’s notions of power, the domination over
nonhumans is linked with agnatic ideology and a dwindling emphasis on reciprocity between affines. To
complete the picture, we must reintroduce the distinction between homosubstitution and

415

heterosubstitution into the discussion. In S. Hugh-Jones’ model of dual shamanism, the Tukanoan
spiritual negotiation of game in exchange for an equivalent number of human souls is classified under
the horizontal pole (1994, 41). This means that horizontal shamanism, along with the white
specialization as its variation, aligns more closely with homosubstitutive exchanges with nonhumans.
Conversely, as I have argued in previous chapters, the role of captaincy, associated with the red
specialization, enables the engagement of inferior items in heterosubstitutive exchange. We thus receive
the following set of correspondences:
Red Specialization
Captaincy Stories
Captains and orphans
Heterosubstitution
Vertical shamanism
Agnatic descent
Gradation of agency
Territorial encompassment

White Specialization
Animal Stories
Sorcerers and healers
Homosubstitution
Horizontal shamanism
Affinal exchange
Ontological equality
Independence of worlds

Table 13. Two ritual specializations in their broad context

The rise of the red specialization and the decline of the white one can thus be seen as another
Amazonian instance of the persistence of vertical shamanism and decline of horizontal shamanism (S.
Hugh-Jones 1994)—or “dejaguarization” in Fausto’s (2007) terms, given the reliance of horizontal
shamans on the power of the jaguar—which has owed to different reasons in each geographical,
historical, and cultural context. Within a small group like the Andoque’s, historical trends can
undoubtedly be explained, in part, by recourse to chance occurrences and specific circumstances. In this
case, a key circumstance was the unparalleled prominence of Yiñékɒ, who belonged to the red
specialization. While today’s elders recount specific teachings that they received in their youth from
Yinñéfɵkn and Joselito, these teachings mainly encompass healing and singing skills, rather than
captaincy or dance organization. Yiñékɒ trained many of young Andoque men in the 1960s and 1970s,
even ones affiliated with the white specialization, like his son Rodolfo. As we have seen in the previous
chapter, the unplanned union between his daughter and Tañe led him to train the latter, whom he had
originally named in the Armadillo Dance, for the red specialization. Yiñékɒ also trained the children of
his ceremonial ally, To̰fi—a unique situation that certainly owed to Yiñékɒ’s central role in the cultural
revitalization efforts, as well as to To̰fi’s premature death before he could properly instruct his children.
However, in addition to these specific circumstances, I propose that three underlying factors have also
contributed to the current dominance of the red career and the decline of the white one. The first factor

416

has already been discussed in Chapter 4—the Andoque’s goal to reproduce and recover their agency
after the rubber genocide, for which the red Multiplying Tree, with its predatory connotations and
emphasis on agnatic descent at the expense of symmetrical exchange with human and nonhuman beings,
was instrumental. Conversely, the Fausíya Dance, which is also associated with the “flood” and tasked
with ensuring peaceful existence in the territory post-event, did not foster self-identification as pó’fiɵ
among those who received their names during its mass name-giving ceremony in the 1950s. Nor did it
lead these individuals to name their children in this dance or the Armadillo or the other white dances.
Furthermore, Fisi’s Fausíya Dance in 1997 did not include a naming ceremony, neither on an individual
nor on a collective basis.
The second factor was the specific measures taken by Yiñékɒ to facilitate the future consolidation of
distinct clan centers. During the 1960s and 1970s, among the various training processes in which Yiñékɒ
was involved, he prepared his son Fisi and two other men of that generation—the firstborn sons of his
ceremonial ally To̰fi and his brother-in-law César—for clan leadership, specifically through the training
into the red specialization. In the case of César’s son, this training contradicted his father’s affiliation
with the white specialization; in the case of Mario, To̰fi’s son, the youngest of the three, this training
also included naming in the Carrier Dance, closely associated with leadership. In the following
generation, Yiñékɒ took an important step in consolidating the future distinct identities of Andoque
clans by naming the firstborn sons of two of his children (Irene and Fisi) and two other men from his
children’s generation in the Carrier Dance. These name givings made the named individuals and their
fathers more committed to the red specialization. It is possible that in the future, once Andoque members
feel that their clan identities are sufficiently consolidated, they will celebrate and express a higher
evaluation of white dances. However, the following factor makes it, in my view, less likely.
This last factor is the growing perception of human beings as superior to nonhumans and the inclination
to engage in asymmetrical exchange with them. These tendencies have been discussed in relation to the
Andoque’s notion of “the Creator” and their general perception of human-nonhuman power dynamics
within their ancestral territory. It is possible that these tendencies are also related to the increasing direct
and indirect contact with Christianity and general Modern assumptions of human domination over
nonhuman entities and the right that human beings supposedly hold to use the latter as they please. More
concretely, the Andoque’s participation in the extractive economy, starting from their return to rubber
work after the genocide, has led to various measures for restricting the agency of the nonhuman entities

417

that they have extracted and traded to prevent eventual damages and retaliation by these entities or the
spirits safeguarding them. These measures, as will be explored in Chapter 13, resonate with the red
ceremonial specialization, especially with its strive to establish the superiority of the human group and
its more stable domination over nonhuman entities. Similar to the Bora’s generalized treatment of
animals as orphans with whom humans, in their generalized status as chiefs, maintain an asymmetrical
relation of protection and domination (Lucas 2021, 21–22), the Andoque’s increasing perception of
nonhuman entities as inferior to humans and the possibility to degrade their agencies obviate the more
reciprocal exchange with them, as promoted by the main white dances. Therefore, while the relatively
general disdain for the white specialization contradicts the regional shift toward a discourse of peace, it
aligns with a growing conception of ontological asymmetry between humans and nonhumans.
In the context of Part III’s discussion of power dynamics among centers, we can conclude that the rise of
the red specialization and the widespread disdain toward the white one are linked with power dynamics
both among human centers and between human and nonhuman ones. The emphasis in red dances on
patrilineal identity and continuity has been vital for the competition between human centers, securing
the independence of one human center from another, and preserving the distinctions between them.
Concomitantly, the empowerment of agnatic agency in these dances envisages the disempowerment of
real and potential human and nonhuman affinal centers. Consequently, this encourages the engagement
in a more aggressive or non-reciprocal exchange with them. Therefore, whereas the interweaving of
inter-human and human-nonhuman relations manifest in the complex general dynamics of conflict
dramatization and mitigation in ceremonial dances, the rise of the red specialization reflects the
interconnection between agnatic ideology in the realm of inter-human relations and human superiority in
the realm of human-nonhuman relations. This reiterates the continuity between asymmetrical exchanges
in inter-human relations and in human-nonhuman relations, as explored in the previous chapters.
As I have shown, several of the dances are specifically associated with the river mouth, representing
non-Indigenous people. The next part of this dissertation will explore this dimension of Andoque dances
within a broader discussion tackling the theme of power dynamics in interactions and exchange with
Whites—a theme which is undoubtedly essential for a fuller understanding of power dynamics among
human centers and between them and nonhuman ones.

418

Part IV
Power Relations with the River Mouth

419

420

Introduction
In the preceding chapters, the presence of non-Indigenous agents and their impact on the Andoque’s
power relations—assessed through the capacity to establish beneficially asymmetrical exchanges of
goods, bodies, vital principles, and agencies among human individuals and groups, as well as between
them and nonhumans—have been mentioned but not directly explored. In this part of the dissertation, I
complete the analysis of power dynamics within Andoque society by tackling key aspects of nonIndigenous presence and impact, addressing the question: How do the Andoque perceive and influence
power dynamics in their interaction with Whites, and how do these interactions affect the Andoque’s
power relations with nonhuman entities? This chapter does not discuss how exchanges with nonIndigenous people have altered power relations among the Andoque themselves. Such impacts have
been examined in previous chapters, specifically focusing on two crucial dimensions: the increased
influence of captains as slave traders and goods distributors, and the role that alliances with nonIndigenous agents have played in the rivalry between the Sun and Eagle Clans.
Ethnographers of the Andoque and other People of the Center have commented on the existence of
longstanding exchange, dating back as early as the seventeenth century, between them and nonIndigenous merchants and slave traders, as well as their Indigenous intermediaries, mainly from areas
downriver controlled by the Portuguese and later Brazilians. They studied the integration of metal axes
and other goods and instruments originating from commerce with non-Indigenous agents into the
Indigenous economy, and the perception of the higher yields and productivity they allow as beneficial
for social reproduction, the nurturing of social relations, the establishment of an exchange network, and
defense from hostile nonhuman beings (Echeverri 2022, 96–103; Griffiths 1998, 232, 246–48; Pineda
Camacho 1975). These accounts correspond to what Sahlins termed the “indigenization of modernity,” a
process by which Indigenous people globally utilize resources acquired from colonial powers to advance
their own development projects and other endeavors inscribed within their respective cosmologies
(Sahlins 1994; 2000). In the Amazonian context, Fausto showed how this approach draws from a
structuralist legacy, particularly on its focus on the assimilation of the Other for fostering social
reproduction (Fausto 2007b). In this respect, it is continuous with notions of appropriating affinal
powers through processes of familiarization explored in this dissertation.
However, as Sahlins (1994) stresses, resource appropriation is certainly not one-sided; non-Indigenous
agents also utilize Indigenous resources for their own goals, which may align more readily with

421

hegemonic endeavors and can ultimately turn against the Indigenous party. In the Andoque case, for
example, Fisi and other members recount that Yiñékɒ managed to impose the Andoque agricultural and
ritual calendar on Miguel Zumaeta during the post-genocide rubber-tapping period, effectively asserting
in which seasons work would be ceased for garden creation and dance celebrations. However, Guzman’s
(1971) observations of the Andoque’s participation in this economy in the 1970s led him to the
somewhat opposite conclusion that their traditional subsistence economic practices were a necessary
condition for the functioning of rubber-tapping activities by allowing the labor force to sustain itself
with minimal investment by the rubber boss, whose profits thus increased. Furthermore, economic
engagements between Indigenous Amazonians and non-Indigenous parties have resulted in dependence
on the external goods and their providers “in the classic sense that on their own, they [can] no longer
produce all the necessary preconditions for the reproduction of their social relations” (Fisher 2000, 13),
thereby subjecting themselves and their territories to exploitative and destructive economic activities.
Andoque members often portray themselves as poor and vulnerable vis-à-vis Whites, citing their
necesidades (needs), a term referring to objects manufactured outside the region. This term translates
two Andoque expressions with distinct meanings and possible associations with two myths narrated in
earlier chapters and discussed below: kahɵ́ɵi, or “our missing [things],” and kama ɵhɵ́ñői, or “that which
we find pretty.” While the latter expression carries a tone of seduction by pretty yet dangerous things
similar to the dolphins figuring in M22, the former brings to mind M5 and a nostalgia for the items
initially engendered at the center to be appropriated by the river mouth (“these [things] are that which
we were missing [kahɵ́ɵi]”, says the son of Egret of the Center to his father), and also, we may presume,
a nostalgia for greater economic independence. Hence, while not referring strictly to items that are
necessary for human existence as opposed to luxury items, as the Spanish term suggests, necesidades
reflects a deeper notion of dependence on the outside.144
Similar to other Indigenous Amazonians (e.g., Buitron and Deshoullière 2023; Kelly 2011), the
Andoque do not oppose the market economy or capitalist logic per se but are primarily concerned about
their persistently disadvantageous position in asymmetric exchanges with non-Indigenous people,
seeking to balance this asymmetry and even utilize resources obtained from non-Indigenous agents for
their own projects and social reproduction. The following chapters, broadly categorized into themes of
consumption, extraction and production, and preservation, demonstrate how the Andoque contemplate
144

For the Amazonian lack of distinction necessities and luxuries see Fisher 2000, 2; S. Hugh-Jones 1992.

422

these asymmetries through the lenses of the predatory relational schema, the kinship notion of
familiarizing affines, and the ontological manipulation of value. In this context, as Chapter 12 shows,
the White is yet another potential affine who must be familiarized if his predatory intentions are to be
thwarted, and his products are to be appropriated and used felicitously. However, the transactions
between Andoque and Whites do not involve only the human transactors, but also nonhuman objects of
transaction—those harvested, detached from their territory and social groups, and traded between
parties. The extractive economy triggers its own predatory reactions by the nonhuman owner-persons of
the harvested entities and destabilizes or complicates relationships of mastery and familiarization with
them that are necessary for achieving specific goals and, more broadly, for territorial management and
social reproduction. This aspect of exchange with non-Indigenous agents, less explored in research, is
the focus of Chapter 13. The final chapter tackles the interactions between the Andoque and Whites in
the relatively new context of environmental action, contemplating the meaning and power dimensions
that the relational triangle between these two parties and nonhumans assumes when non-Indigenous
agents try to mobilize Indigenous people for the protection, rather than harvest, of nonhuman entities.

423

424

Chapter 12. Predation by and Familiarization of the River Mouth
Similar to neighboring People of the Center (Echeverri 2022, 106–8), the Andoque language contains
two terms for non-Indigenous people: “Burners” (duiɵ́hɵ) and “Traders” (dohaɵ́hɵ). In the Andoque
case, this duality alludes to the two manifestations of the White Man in Andoque mythology, either as
an enemy or as an affine, and, as such, an exchange partner. In this chapter, I discuss the different
images of Whites as enemies and affines in Andoque myth, ritual, and other discursive contexts, and
explore the dangers of predation and seduction by the river mouth and the various mechanisms through
which the Andoque attempt to cope with these dangers and impose reciprocal exchange on Whites.
These dangers and the mechanisms for counteracting them are expressed and operate through the
categories of space, kinship, and humanity examined throughout this dissertation: the positions of river
source, center, and mouth; affinal exchange and the familiarization of non-kin; and human beings vs.
nonhuman beings.
The Axe Jaguar and Other Predators
The inimical, dangerous nature of non-Indigenous agents is encoded in the aggressions undertaken by
Egret of the River Mouth in the myth about the “War of the Speaking Tree,” briefly discussed in
Chapter 1. However, the reason for the rage that this hero nurtures toward Egret of the Center—namely,
the desire for the latter’s wife that leads to his humiliation and almost costs him his life—hints at his
nature as a potential affine. This potential materializes in M5, where Egret of the River Mouth takes the
daughter of Egret of the Center and the goods to which she has given birth, appropriating the
reproductive capacity of these goods, and eventually trading some of them with his brother-in-law from
the center—a trade that can also be understood as the counter-transfer of women. It is noteworthy that
“Trader” does not refer only to Whites, but also to Andoque and other Indigenous individuals trading
with them. In other words, it signifies a relation, not a defined collective.
The affinal nature with which the Andoque invest the non-Indigenous hero, and the moral obligation to
which marital exchange with him gives rise, are not to be taken for granted. Myths narrated by
neighboring Peoples of the Center on the origin of non-Indigenous people, their goods, or commerce
with them allude to only one of these components but not both. The Bora, for example, tell about trade
in goods without marital exchange (Lucas 2019, 372–73), while the Miraña tell about sexual seduction
without an eventual union and reproduction, even describing something we may call “co-parenting”
without a sexual union (Karadimas 2005, 171–75, 360–67). The Nɨpóde, on the other hand, locate the
425

discrepancy in reproductive capacity of manufactured goods between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
people within the consanguineal relation between a White and Indigenous sister (Griffiths 1998, 247),
rather than in the moments preceding and following the union with the White hero, as in M5. The
comparison with the Andoque’s farther neighbors, the Tukanoan groups of the Vaupes River, is the most
salient. For these groups, whose strong emphasis on agnatic descent is complemented by a strive for
balanced matrimonial exchange between language groups, the mythical hero representing Whites is cast
out of the system of ritual and exogamic exchange. After the Indigenous ancestors chose the bow and
ritual ornaments offered to them by the creator god, the White was left with the gun, symbolizing his
transformation from affine to enemy and explaining why war is the equivalent of ritual for nonIndigenous people (S. Hugh-Jones 1988, 144–45).
The act of locating Whites within the Amazonian complex of enmity and affinity, along with the
accompanying desire to transition them from behaving like the former to adopting the latter role, is also
documented among other groups in the region (e.g., Grenand and Grenand 2000). However, in the case
of the Andoque, these inclinations are conveyed through the language of spatial concepts. The
distinction between “Burners” and “Traders” is inherent to M5, where it is conveyed through the spatial
categories of river source and river mouth: Egret of the River Mouth is the trader brother-in-law, while
Egret of the River Source is the frustrated, violent burner. In my interlocutors’ interpretation, this
spatialization reflects both the historical fact of the arrival of the first non-Indigenous merchants and
their Indigenous middlemen, and later the agents of the Casa Arana, from downriver, on the one hand,
and a prophecy concerning the descent of Colombian dissident armed groups from the cordillera, and
hence, the river source, on the other. However, within the perspectivist framework for understanding
spatial categories employed throughout this dissertation, we may put it in the following terms: placing
Whites toward the river source implies that the Andoque are relegated to the position of their prey, while
placing them toward the river mouth preserves the position of predator for the Andoque. Exchange of
goods is thus possible, desired, or beneficial for one insofar as one is found in the position of predator,
but impossible, undesired, or detrimental insofar as one is found in a position of prey. A central
Andoque ambition is to ensure that the non-Indigenous agents they encounter act like traders from the
river mouth and not like burners from the river source, or, put differently, to employ an upstream
position in relation to them. This is another instance in which the cannibalistic fluvial system underlies
the captaincy fluvial system, as explored in Part I.

426

In ceremonial songs, the predatory nature of Whites is expressed through terms such as “Jaguar of the
River Mouth” (ɵkɒ́ ḭño̰), “Axe Jaguar of the River Mouth” (pɵɵ ɵkɒ́ ḭño̰), “Jaguar of Goods” (dohai ḭño̰),
or “Goods Thunder of the River Mouth” (dohai dú’dɨ ḭño̰), as well as other combinations of these and
other components (Pineda Camacho 1979, 43). Equally frequent is the reference to Whites in these
songs as enemies, yó’o. The predatory nature of non-Indigenous people, their nonhuman status, and their
interconnected immoral behavior have become common themes in descriptions of Indigenous
Amazonian understandings (Buchillet 2000; Bonilla 2005; Overing 1996; Severi 1988; van Velthem
2000). The use of such predatory metaphors when referring to Whites may allude to various dimensions
and effects of interactions with them. Firstly, as Griffiths documents for the Nɨpóde, these metaphors
may record the memory of the “devouring” of Indigenous individuals who were captured or purchased
by slave traders from downstream, never to return to their families (1998, 247, n.33). Secondly, given
that death from various misfortunes is typically interpreted as predation by the agent responsible for the
misfortune and assimilation into their place of origin, these predatory metaphors may also refer to the
massive death caused by epidemics. The Andoque associate these epidemics with the river mouth,
explaining that they shadowed the highly coveted metal tools and other goods obtained from Whites.
The association of non-Indigenous people with epidemics and misfortunes linked to the river mouth is
prominent in dreams, which serve as a medium for learning about impending events. Following the
metonymical interpretation mode of dreams discussed in Appendix 5, several interlocutors explained to
me that dreaming about a church, priests, or nuns represents an epidemic associated with fish,
originating from downriver, of which these non-Indigenous religious figures are considered the ownerpersons. Dreams featuring certain objects symbolizing the might of Whites, particularly airplanes and
the city, foretell death or a complete departure from ancestral traditions and beliefs, potentially leaving
the person vulnerable to fatal misfortunes. The concentration of such epidemics around the Caquetá
River, which served as a prime course of transport, is encoded in the figure of Bone Egret (Yo’fítanń), a
powerful captain who lived on the south bank of the river, roughly around Parrot/Pet Savanna. He would
seduce people to follow him when he played his flute,145 taking them with him and “enchanting them”
(los encantó), thereby transforming them into nonhuman entities.
Considering the discussion on ritual dynamics in the previous chapter, it becomes evident that invoking
the aggressions and damages caused by Whites during ceremonial dances, along with other forms of

145

We should bear in mind that some flutes were made of bird bones—e.g., the síiru in M9.

427

direct and indirect predation by them, serves as an opportunity for the dance organizers to ward off these
dangers. They achieve this by offering ritual substances to the visible dance participants, and through
them, to the invisible forces associated with the river mouth. However, in this context, I would also like
to propose a more specific hypothesis related to obiikoi, the ritual of caguana distribution that precedes
five of the tutelary dances—Multiplying Tree, Head, Fausíya, and the two River Turtle Dances.
While all ceremonial dances involve risks for the hosts and guests—for instance, if the former fail to
provide adequate compensation for games and songs, or if the latter falter in their song-dances— these
five dances are deemed particularly perilous. This is because performing them inadequately can trigger
large-scale catastrophes, such as warfare and, especially, epidemics. My interlocutors explained to me
that the caguana distribution ceremony, conducted on the eve of these dances, serves as a safeguard
against such occurrences. But what is it about these dances that necessitates extra protection, and what is
it about the caguana beverage that provides this protection? We might assume that the more complex
relationships and broader alliances sought to be established and activated by these dances, along with the
elevated prestige associated with them—particularly if we accept the model presented in the previous
chapter concerning birth order and the corresponding rights to partake in specific ceremonies—
historically attracted larger attendances compared to other, less prestigious dances. During the postcontact centuries characterized by waves of epidemics that decimated Indigenous populations, this
higher attendance may have turned these central dances into potential vectors for contagion. People
could subsequently link the extinction of entire clans and other populations to these preceding events.
Paradoxically, this zenith of the captain’s prestige and his ability to negotiate with nonhuman entities
and “manage the territory” also represented a significant vulnerability, as it exposed entire groups to
predation by malevolent pathogenic agents associated with the river mouth.
In a similar vein to how individuals manipulate nonhuman entities in conflicts with other human beings,
this connection between tutelary dances and epidemic outbreaks is remembered today in anecdotes
recounting how powerful elders who were not invited to these dances employed sorcery to summon the
agents responsible for such plagues and directed them to attack the groups of the captains who neglected
to invite them. According to Fisi, the powerful sorcerer Fisidú’dɨ (“Stone Thunder”), was responsible for
the disappearance of the Tinamou and Tufted Capuchin Clans due to measles.146 Furthermore, in Fisi’s
story of Bone Egret, this enigmatic figure roamed from one clan territory to another, leaving death and
146

Fisi also alluded to these incidents in an interview found in Gómez López et al. 1998, 122–23.

428

chaos in his wake. One sorcerer, whose house Bone Egret visited, recognized the visitor and chose not to
resist but to welcome and treat him well. This sorcerer then succeeded in forming an alliance with Bone
Egret and gained the ability to harness his epidemics for his own purposes. This adds a further
dimension to our discussion in Part III of the continuity between power asymmetries in inter-human and
human-nonhuman relations. While the nonhumans concerned in those cases are beings inhabiting the
Andoque territory, here we observe the manipulation of nonhuman entities associated with Whites.
I suggest that over the long period of such epidemic cycles, the Andoque—and possibly other People of
the Center, who also practice this ceremony (Gasché 2009, 28–29; Echeverri 2022, 36)—incorporated
the ritual of caguana distribution on the eve of major dances as a safeguard for participants against such
predation. This ceremony is conducted by and for the dance workers, i.e., the organizing clan, with a
man and a woman offering vessels of caguana to the participants, while singing songs that typically
include critique of the captain and fellow clan members (de la Hoz Melo 2005, 67–74). As de la Hoz
showed, many caguana songs allude to relations with Whites (ibid, 70), and some songs make explicit
references to the slave trade:
You treated me like I am worthless (hɵ́’tá; also: “empty”).
You did not talk to me well,
You wanted to send (pa̰; also “to command”) me away with your merchant (hadoha),
But after I am gone, who else can accompany (ɵʼɵhɵ; also: “to help”) you with your calabash vessel (ha’podi)?147

Gasché described the critique songs in the caguana distribution ceremony as a means for dance workers
to vent internal conflicts before the main event (2009, 28–29). However, given the association between
caguana, semen, and masculinity,148 on one hand, and the perception of illnesses and resulting death as
the outcome of consubstantiality and sexual union with nonhuman entities, on the other, we may
presume that this ceremony aims to protect people by extending the shelter of the patriclan to them. The
ceremonial songs include allusions to the participants as the personnel of Egret of the Center, or, more
precisely, as members of his generation (yapɵa oɵ́tɵ, literally: “the children of his fathers”), as
exemplified in the following verses:

See a similar Bora and Miraña song in Guyot 1979, 110.
See M3 and the comparison before manicuera and caguana preparation in Chapter 6. For a similar association between
caguana and semen among the Féénemɨna, see Londoño Sulkin 2012, 112.
147

148

429

We find the seat (kupa) of Egret of the Center beautiful (hɵ́ñoa).
On this seat he sits with his generation.

I was explained that before the caguana ceremony begins, the host iterates a prayer to Egret (Yo’fí)—
who, in this context, represents Whites, and is also referred to as yó’o (enemy)—beseeching him to avert
his gaze and not to observe the celebrants, thereby avoiding harm to them. The interlocutor who
provided me this explanation did not agree to share the prayer with me, as it is considered particularly
dangerous, while others refrained from recording the opening verse of the first song of caguana
distribution for the same reason. Nonetheless, one interlocutor described the general message of this
song, which consists of the singer’s appeal to the participants as the children of Egret, imploring them
not to heed “ugly things” (see also de la Hoz Melo 2005, 69). Another interlocutor recorded the verses
with which a singer belonging to the white ritual specialization can reply to the opening verses:
This is the calabash vessel of tnknñe149
That we are drinking.
With his generation he drank this tnknñe calabash vessel.

The narrative T4 on the adventures of the Piercers told by Raquel (see Appendix 2) attests to the link
between Egret, epidemics, and the defense provided by drinking caguana. The caguana distribution
songs emerge as critical means to build immunity from Bone Egret’s epidemics and to ensure the
survival of human beings, an outcome the Piercers could have achieved had they performed them
correctly. The examples that Raquel gives for the Piercers’ incorrect use of the Andoque language—
namely, the replacement of the male form with the female one—may relate to their inability to benefit
from the protection that the caguana distribution could have provided them, for the same reason that
they could not properly give themselves names: they could not tap into a strong origin, which, as it
passes down the patriline, depends on men self-identifying as such and as the successors of elder male
relatives and ancestors.150 It thus seems that the caguana distribution ceremony aims to safeguard dance
A white derivative prepared from the heart of the peach palm trunk.
Pineda (1979, 46) decisively states that the caguana distribution ceremony is also called Egret Dance without justifying
this statement. My Andoque interlocutors largely refrained from telling me about the Egret Dance, since it is no longer held
today (while the caguana distribution ceremony is still celebrated). From the few hints that I have gathered on this ritual, it
seems to have been a violent event with certain similarities to anthropophagous dances, before which the captive was forcibly
fed. Prior to an Egret Dance, a live egret would be captured and fed with fish obtained from a massive harvest (possibly by
asphyxiating plants) within a small stream. One interlocutor told me that during the ceremony, people would dance with the
egret, with the dancer in whose hands it dies being put to death. This practice mirrors the exaggerated “omens” of cannibal
dances, where any social gesture costed an individual’s life. This arbitrariness, as opposed to the captain’s decision as to
which of his men dies or traded, could mark the Egret Dance as an “anti-captaincy” dance. It is possible that the captive egret
represented slave traffickers operating along the river. Based on my hypothesis above, the caguana distribution ceremony

149
150

430

organizers and workers by creating a strong agnatic identification before the exogamic exchanges with
real and potential, human and nonhuman affines taking place during the actual dance, as a buffer against
epidemics representing massive predation by the affinal powers associated with the river mouth.
The goal of preventing predation from the river mouth sheds light on another aspect of the caguana
distribution ceremony: the naming of the maloquero’s daughters during this specific ceremony, unlike
their brothers who receive their names within the tutelary dances that follow, or their girlfriends who do
not belong to a maloca family, and whose naming in the Armadillo Dance takes place during the dance
itself. Given that past maloqueros, when short of war captives and in need of non-Indigenous goods,
preferred to trade distant kin connected through female relatives over clan members, naming daughters
in a ceremony associated with agnatic protection seems intended to ensure that future captains—namely,
their brothers—consider the daughters’ descendants as true kin rather than as disposable orphans. This is
supported by my interlocutors’ statements that the protection afforded by naming extends to the named
person’s siblings and offspring. By naming his daughter in this ceremony, a maloquero infuses his clan
identity into her, ensuring that her children—likely bearing her husband’s clan identity—are treated as
genuine kin.
The fact that non-Indigenous goods were often accompanied by epidemics signifies that exchange with
Whites is not an automatic guarantee from being aggressed and preyed upon by them. Even as a trader,
the White can commission yoóka, or “deviating things.”151 In some contexts, this term refers to useless
things, such as certain objects obtained from Whites whose use and benefit to people their Indigenous
recipients could not understand, as opposed to bɨ’iá, or “working tools,” whose benefit was clear to the
recipients from the outsets. However, my interlocutors explain that yoóka also designates any externally
manufactured goods insofar as their use eventually appears to have resulted in aches, diseases, accidents,
envy, and conflicts among its users—i.e., in different forms whereby the latter diverge from their
original intentions and end up in undesired mental, physical, and social states. In this meaning, it is also
opposed to bɨ’iá, a term which extends to encompassing any goods that eventually serve to pursue the
user’s projects and contribute to the well-being, prosperity, and reproduction of themselves and their
family.

would thus not be identical to the Egret Dance, but rather may have been perceived as an antidote against the predatory harms
wrought by “egrets”—both non-Indigenous merchants and the Indigenous captains trading with them.
151
Despite the similarity between the words, there is no apparent etymological link between yoóka and yó’o (enemy)(Jon
Landaburu, Pers. Comm., November 2022).

431

The narration of M5 plays a crucial role in ensuring that the goods arriving at the Andoque would serve
as “working tools” rather than “deviating things.” Upon revisiting this story, we can observe that Trader
Egret of the River Mouth initially offers his brother-in-law from the center perfume and red cloth,
symbolizing the flu and anger, which the latter wisely refuses, choosing to bring back only work
instruments.152 Andoque members explain that when engaging in exchange with Whites, M5 is
recounted during mambeadero sessions to reject any deviations or risks that may result from the
reception of non-Indigenous goods, in a bid to transform these objects of exchange into life-giving
artifacts. Symbolic manipulation is employed to render them harmless to the Andoque, allowing them to
utilize metal tools for their own social reproduction projects instead of being harmed by them in
accidents or conflicts where these tools might be used as weapons, thus jeopardizing their existence as
true human beings. For example, rifles are transformed into productive hunting tools rather than
dangerous instruments for interpersonal attacks by naming them ḭkn—a term referring to any rod,
including those used in dances to manage the territory—instead of duidi, or “burner tube,” an object
operating on its own “hot” inclination. Similarly, regarding alcohol, Fisi explained to me that a
mambeador can benefit from the ambivalence of the term poɵdíe, which signifies both “sleep-water”
and “axe-water,” to direct its use for harmless sleep instead of the potentially dangerous axe-related
activities. One interlocutor provided a version of the story where, upon receiving the bottle of alcohol
from Egret of the River Mouth with his left hand, Egret of the Center tricked his rival by passing it
behind his back, placing it in his right hand and thus avoiding from consuming a drink whose deleterious
effects he intuited. This element of the story can be told to steer away from alcohol consumption. More
generally, the depiction of the metal axe and the other items stolen by Egret of the River Mouth as
originally engendered by the daughter of Egret of the Center places them as essentially consanguineal
kin of the Andoque. Once conceived as such, these items should not bring them harm but rather offer
them support.
Additionally, in the context of exchange with Whites, the narration of this myth is typically
accompanied by the offering of ritual substances, namely, tobacco paste, coca powder, and manicuera,
to the Mother of Merchandise or Lady Counting. In M5, these substances allow the word of Egret of the
Center to gain prominence over that of Egret of the River Mouth. We may here recall that M3 traces
these ritual substances back to the river source, while other myths associate coca and tobacco, or their
See also Pineda Camacho 1975, 454–55. Pineda mentions different exchange items the harms they represent likewise lead
to classify them as yoóka.
152

432

correct preparation, with other directions and altitudes (M1; M14; M15).153 Although this interpretation
was not suggested by my Andoque interlocutors, I propose that M3 was crafted and narrated to
constitute these cultivars, along with the maloca, as a counterweight to resist the influence and
aggression of the river mouth. This represents a specific manifestation for the role that Amerindian
myths, according to Lévi-Strauss, have played in absorbing the shocks of history and helping the people
who conceive them come to terms with history (Lévi-Strauss 1981, 607; see also Gow 2001, 10–11).
This manifestation was shaped and became effective through the Andoque’s spatial logic, serving not
solely to reconcile them with historical processes but also as a key symbolic instrument in power
dynamics involving central agents of these processes—namely, Whites. Within the spatial logic of the
egret river universe, these familiarizing substances enable the upstream retrieval of some of the objects
begotten in the center by Lady Counting, which were appropriated by the river mouth. More generally,
the blanket association of cultivars as well as the maloca with that direction may be part of a strategic
portrayal of the river source as an arsenal against the river mouth, aiding the center in overcoming it.
The vivid and horrific “Tale on the Boat of Goods” (T5) recounts a specific case of massive predation
by agents from the river mouth and is widely shared by Andoque members. According to these
interlocutors, the narrated event dates to a time before the late nineteenth-century rubber boom. During
that period, merchants from downriver sailed on the Caquetá, trading goods with the Andoque clans
inhabiting the river margin, especially the Cacambra Clan (kaó; Daptridus ater), in exchange for the
salted fish that the latter caught in excessive quantities. Once, when a trade boat approached their
settlement, the Cacambra rushed onboard to admire the goods brought by the merchants. They tried on
hats, admired their appearance in the mirrors, and sprayed themselves with perfume. In Miraña, the
language of the Indigenous people residing downstream from the Andoque, one merchant said to
another, “Today we go.” When they suddenly left port, the people became trapped, and the goods turned
malevolent: the hats caused headaches, and the perfumes caused the flu. Those looking at the mirrors
went mad. Downriver from the mouth of the Macaw River, at Swelling Falls (Po̰fisia), the boat sank,
and all the Cacambra, except for their captain who had refused to embark on the boat, disappeared with
the merchants. Despite the language they spoke, these merchants were not Miraña; they were kakńño̰e
(“People of Below”), or, more precisely, dolphins: an embodiment of the river masters. They were

In M1, the river source element is present in the origin of the earthworm that becomes the first coca plant. However, it is
only prepared correctly at the maloca of Shadow Egg’s daughter, meaning, at the center and on the forest floor. In M14 and
M15 tobacco is associated with fish, i.e., the river and river mouth.

153

433

“enchanted” (encantados) and turned into riverine spirits, like their captors, and similar to most members
of Spix’s Guan Clan, who would later suffer the same catastrophe. We will return to this danger in the
next chapter because Andoque members attribute it to the Cacambra and Spix’s Guan’s unconstrained
predation of the persons of the land—in this case, fish—without providing their guardian spirits the
necessary ritual offerings. Notably, as the heroes of this cautionary tale narrating the first horrible,
collective retaliation by the territory’s spirits for irresponsible participation in extractive activities to
trade with Whites, the Cacambra Clan play a similar role to Lady Cacambra in M23—that of warning
people of dangers approaching them from the river mouth.
The Seductive Dolphin
The image of the dolphin encodes for the Andoque the danger of disadvantageous exchange with nonIndigenous agents, where the latter repay transfers of goods or persons from Indigenous people with no
compensation or with “deviating things” which lead to illnesses, accidents, conflicts, and death. As
explored in Chapter 9, the Andoque share with many other Indigenous and fishermen societies in the
Caquetá-Putumayo and Amazonia the association between dolphins and Whites, as well as the emphasis
on sexual and erotic seduction as a prime means through which both dolphins and Whites lure
individuals into their habitats, cities, and this way incorporate them into a nonhuman or non-Indigenous
existence (Arregui 2019; Echeverri and Pereira 2005, 133; Karadimas 2005, 360–68; Maués 2006;
Reichel 1989; Slater 1994). Andoque interlocutors emphasize that dolphins are human (son gente) with
a frequency and intensity that go beyond the typical belief that all animals were once human and
maintain a human-like existence in the realm of mythology. Although the Andoque’s taxonomy does not
classify the dolphin as an aquatic mammal, they recognize that, while it inhabits the aquatic sphere
where humans cannot survive, it differs from fish in its mode of breathing, sexual organs resembling
those of humans,154 and intelligence, by which fishermen sometimes find themselves outsmarted when
competing with dolphins for fish. Therefore, the dolphin mirrors human beings, similar to how Whites
mirror Indigenous people. It is a being homologous to humans in a different realm, of which it is often
considered the owner-person. As discussed in Chapter 9, dolphins appear as charming, beautiful men
and women dressed in white clothes and decorated with fancy accessories, like hats, watches, ties, and
more, resembling non-Indigenous foreigners and even city-dwellers. However, sexual contact with
them, mostly in dreams triggered by one’s gesture of approval or interest during one’s waking hours can
154

For similar views among the Yucuna-Matapí, see Reichel 1989, 114.

434

prove fatal. As Echeverri and Pereira (2005) cogently argued, the word through which the Andoque, like
other Peoples of the Center, designate dolphins—ama̰na̰—was borrowed from Tupi. This borrowing
likely took place in the nineteenth century, as these hinterland peoples approached the main rivers for
trade with Whites, increasingly discovering both the seductive forces of their goods and these new
aquatic beings.
M22, the origin story of dolphins, traces their dangerousness to a deceptive transaction. Within the
idiom of kinship, this deception is conceived as incest: the sexual union between Lady Peccary and her
brother Pretty, which indicates the former’s preference for her family of origin over a sincere
incorporation into her husband’s projects, and her brother’s withholding of the person whom he has
allegedly given to Green Tapir. The aggressiveness displayed by these siblings, now transformed into
dolphins, and Lady Peccary’s sons, stems from this incestuous union. As Lévi-Strauss (1969) argued,
such a union symbolizes the incestuous person’s reluctance to establish a kinship alliance and suspend
enmity with others—in essence, to collectively build culture and society. The association between
Whites, their aggressiveness, and incest also appears in Tukanoan mythology. In this case, this
association is tied to their non-participation in the regional system of linguistic exogamy and ritual
exchange, which is aimed at maintaining a balance between agnatic descent and marital alliances, and is
deeply rooted in the settlement patterns along the river (S. Hugh-Jones 1988, 145). For the Andoque,
who do not participate in such a marital exchange system, the theme of incest can be understood within
the cosmo-spatial framework which distributes differential predatory agencies across the river course
and its corresponding elevations. Reciprocal and beneficial exchange with a person from downriver,
who, by virtue of their position, should possess a lesser predatory agency than ego, is more probable
than with a person from upstream, endowed with a greater such agency and capable of appropriating
things and persons through more aggressive means. Therefore, while the danger emanating from the
river source is overt predation, that of the river mouth is associated with deceptive exchanges.155

The theme of incest is subtly suggested in M5. In a version of the myth relayed to me by Raquel, Lady Counting becomes
pregnant after inhaling the smoke of tobacco paste prepared by her brother, who had previously cautioned her against
approaching it. While it is the vegetal salt added to tobacco paste after its preparation that is linked to semen (Chapter 6), the
warning against accessing her brother’s property and her subsequent disregard for it hint at an incestuous encounter, which
might have been more explicit in the story’s earlier versions. If my assumption holds true, and considering the association
between sexual relations and predation, it could be inferred that the introduction of non-Indigenous agents resulted from
internal, possibly domestic, conflicts, thereby aligning with other Amerindian myths regarding contact with Whites (Mason
1990 in Overing 1996, 59). Goods that are (nowadays) manufactured externally could be seen as inherently risky because
they were initially engendered too internally during mythic times.

155

435

The River Turtle-Bamboo Dance confronts the dangers from the river mouth, including overt violence,
epidemics, and harmful goods, by calming down the anger (mntúi) of entities from that direction, which
is perceived as animating these dangers, through ritual offerings. Here, both the imported goods and the
offered substances possess the gift dimension of serving as extensions of their producers, embodying
their intentions. The fact that these intentions revolve around predation or resisting it illustrates the
encompassment of gift-like transactions by predatory dynamics. To reduce the anger animating imported
goods, many of the songs of this dance evoke weapons, with the expectation that providing ritual
substances to the singer-dancers will familiarize these entities. Since this anger and aggressiveness are
linked with the non-reciprocity of incest, the Bamboo Dance is perceived as a dance of exogamous
exchange (Pineda Camacho 1979, 48), which puts a stronger emphasis on reciprocity between host and
guest than other ceremonies—reciprocity which, in the case of the equivalent dance among the Bora,
even concerns the species of game animals that the host of the first dance must bring as a guest to the
second dance (Lucas 2019, 330–31). Although Andoque members agree on the importance of this
dance, they report that the last time it was held was in 2002, as part of the efforts to shield the group
from violence committed by and against the armed dissident groups that controlled the region during
that time.
As we have seen in the previous chapter, the other River Turtle Dance—namely, Carrier Dance—
overcomes the dangers stemming from the river mouth by adhering to agnatic identity. This alternative
strategy, which, in line with the general rise to prominence of the red ritual specialization, presently
gains further ground, also underlies the general perception of dolphin assaults as resulting from
promiscuous behavior or exaggerate sexual desire. As explored in Chapter 9, such behavior and
inclinations indicate one’s dispositions to consubstantiality with affines, which the dolphin (and other
dangerous beings) would take as interest in sexual intercourse. By contrast, a person’s stronger focus on
their patriclan identity and traditions would protect them from drifting toward this world of human and
nonhuman, Indigenous and non-Indigenous affinity. Furthermore, within a patrilocal society such as the
Andoque’s, women, who anticipate leaving their origin clan upon marriage, are relatively marginal
members of the clan and, as such, are more likely to be attracted by such potential affines with whom
matrimony is undesired. For this reason, women are considered more vulnerable to become ill by the
rain accompanying the afternoon rainbow, which appears downstream. Some interlocutors associate this
rainbow with Lady Peccary, who, in their version of M22, illuminated the earth once her brother Pretty
set out to seduce women at the center, thus assisting his misdeeds. On the other hand, others describe
436

this rainbow as an embodiment of Green Tapir, who himself became a miscreant figure in this myth,
operating like his brother-in-law after pacifying his vengeful sons. Either way, Andoque members are
unanimous as to women’s higher vulnerability to illnesses transmitted through sexual seduction and
associated with this rainbow.
Similar to how death caused by misfortunes attributed to nonhuman entities is perceived as an
incorporation into their societies, we can consider the process of incorporation into the non-Indigenous
society as continuous with predation by the river mouth and its agents. “Becoming White” is referred to
in the Andoque language as duíhɵ tii, or “becoming burners.” While seduction by dolphins primarily
communicates the risk to the seduced individual, “becoming burners” communicates the risk that the
transformed person poses to their Indigenous (ex-)kin. This is illustrated in the following River TurtleBamboo song:
Where did your father go?
To the end of another land (kusíka ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí)
The peccaries (ḭń) have taken the otter.
Is it the land where we were formed (katini)?
In the forest where your father was born (yapɵ otidefɵ),
The peccaries took the otter (fɨɵ) down there.
Unaware that it was him,
And although it was his father, he wanted to burn him (yaya dú’ini).

Some interlocutors view this song as a criticism of the maloquero, who, much like the otter, has
allegedly been hijacked by the Whites (the peccaries, like Lady Peccary who swam to the river mouth
and her sons) and turned against his own kin and origin, symbolized by his father, wishing to exercise on
them a form of violence associated with Whites—i.e., burning. On a more quotidian register, various
interlocutors, both youth and elders, express concerns about Andoque individuals who have relocated to
the city or acquired non-Indigenous education. They worry that these individuals may take actions
detrimental to their relatives who continue to live in the ancestral territory, potentially favoring their new
non-Indigenous allies. Given this context, we can view the persistence of reciprocal exchange between
the Andoque living in the territory and their relatives in the cities as an attempt to uphold commensality,
consubstantiality, and consequently, consanguinity. Within this exchange, the inhabitants of the
ancestral territory send fish, game, and manioc products to their city-dwelling relatives, who, in turn,
reciprocate with bread, pastries, clothing, and other non-Indigenous items that their relatives may

437

require. In recent years, Andoque territory and city dwellers have also ventured into business
collaborations, where city dwellers sell products such as coca powder, and to a lesser extent, vegetal salt
and tobacco paste, all produced by their relatives in the reserves. This collaborative effort not only helps
those in the reserves earn income but also allows those in the cities to collect a sales commission,
maintaining their connection to the nourishing resources of the ancestral territory.
This connection is important because, as we have seen in previous chapters, one is regarded as truly
human when living within their ancestral territory, nourishing themselves with its plants and animals,
and being part of a group that communicates with the nonhuman inhabitants of the territory for the
safety and well-being of its members. On several occasions, doubts about the human status of
Indigenous individuals who have relocated from the reserves and lost contact with their relatives living
there have been raised, primarily by elders. Just as Whites are associated with predatory and immoral
beings that are not considered as truly human, the process of becoming White may result in such a loss
of one’s full human status. In this context, it is critical to note that, from the Andoque’s point of view, as
observed by Kelly (2011) among the Yanomami, becoming White and being Indigenous are not
mutually exclusive options. While I would not assert the existence of a “duiɵ́hɵ transformational axis”
among the Andoque, as Kelly observed among the Yanomami, where individuals assume the role of a
non-Indigenous person when interacting with people located upstream and that of an Indigenous person
when interacting with those residing downstream, statements made by Andoque members reflect the
notion that, to some extent, they have all become White. This holds implications for power dynamics
with nonhuman entities.
The Andoque occasionally describe themselves as “civilized” (civilizados), positioning themselves on a
spectrum that spans between the categories of Indians (índios) and Whites (blancos). Initial impressions
garnered from statements by interlocutors suggest that one’s place along this spectrum is determined by
their degree of engagement with and dependence on non-Indigenous commodities and cultivars.
Consequently, uncontacted Indigenous groups said to inhabit their vicinity and Indigenous communities
dwelling along the Apaporis and Vaupés Rivers, who are reported not to possess items such as shoes and
clothing, are frequently cited as exemplars of true “Indians,” and people may say “I am very Indian”
when explaining their dislike of some non-Indigenous foodstuffs. Conversely, urban residents represent
the White category, with the city often referred to as “the Whites’ Land” in the native language (duiɵ́hɵ
ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí). Hence, some interlocutors do not classify settlers, who share relatively similar economic

438

circumstances with the Andoque, as White but view them as constituting a distinct category within this
spectrum. However, less conspicuous factors that contribute to determining one’s “Whiteness” or
“Indianness” encompass cognitive and spiritual dimensions, such as possessing skills and aptitudes
associated with formal education, including literacy and numeracy, on one hand, and the ability to
engage with one’s clan heritage or mythology on the other. Elders who uphold these cultural principles
are praised as índios. The notion of being “civilized” refers to incorporating elements from both ends of
this spectrum.156
As demonstrated in the descriptions of the consequences of consuming non-Indigenous foodstuffs in
Chapter 9, the economic and cognitive-spiritual parameters are interconnected, as this consumption
makes one unamenable to sorcery and healing procedures and hinders the communication with spirits
required to perform these practices. As discussed in that section, the strong flavors of some of these
foodstuffs impede the consubstantiality with spirits necessary for acting as either the agent or the patient
of these procedures. On the other hand, consuming such foodstuffs and other non-Indigenous items
makes consubstantiality with certain entities more likely, as the following example shows. During one of
my stays at Fisi’s maloca, members of the family spotted jaguar footprints on the long path connecting
the house to a harbor on the Caquetá River. Over the following week, they expressed their concerns
about going there, especially alone, for fear of a jaguar attack. When I mentioned that I was planning to
go there to make a phone call and enjoy the better reception by the Caquetá, one of Fisi’s sons cautioned
me about the jaguar. However, Fisi reassured me, stating that I had nothing to fear because jaguars
dislike the smells of soap and perfume, which are characteristic of non-Indigenous people, including
myself. He added that these scents, on the other hand, attract dolphins. Based on this anecdote, we can
surmise that dolphins are drawn to the Andoque and assault them not only because they wish to
incorporate them into their society but also because they already discern something “White,” and as
such, dolphin-like, in the Andoque, a predilection for non-Indigenous commodities and comfort. After
all, the dolphin often seduces people near the main rivers, to which the Andoque have ventured due to
their desire for trade with Whites. Therefore, “becoming white” is associated with a certain vulnerability
to nonhuman attacks, and a reduced capacity to master relations with them.
As this dissertation aims to unravel the construction and operation of power dynamics at the crossroads
of human-nonhuman relations and Indigenous-non-Indigenous interactions, it is imperative to delve

156

For a similar perception of White/Indigenous duality, see Vilaça 2007.

439

deeper into the precise nature of the association between dolphins and non-Indigenous actors. Much of
the anthropological literature surrounding this Amazonian association, including the previously cited
works, adheres to a representative framework, where dolphins are viewed as symbolic representations of
Whites, and the potential risks associated with engaging with dolphins are considered as metaphors
illustrating the perils posed by non-Indigenous agents or the process of assimilation into their society
(e.g., de Magalhães Lima 2014; Reichel 1989; Slater 1994). By contrast, my perspective on this matter
is inspired by Viveiros de Castro’s (2004) critique of the division between the literal and metaphorical
and anthropologists’ corresponding tendency to go beyond their interlocutors’ literal messages on the
nonhuman world, discussing them as encoded messages restricted to the social domain concerning interhuman relations. Metaphor involves the presumption of a discontinuity between target and source, and at
a broader semiotic level, it implies a hierarchy between sign and referent, language and world. In
anthropology, it often manifests in the method of “cultural translation,” which compares the symbolic
interpretations that a given object, postulated by the anthropologist, receives across societies. On the
other hand, the Deleuzian framework employed by Viveiros de Castro emphasizes the notion of
immanence, favoring semiotic processes that assume less or no hierarchy between language and reality
and the existence of continuities between domains of signification, such as metonymy, indexicality, and
literality (idem 2014, 102–6). In anthropology, Viveiros de Castro calls for the application of this
framework through a “perspectival translation,” examining the transductive function that the same sign
can assume in different ontologies (2004, 20).
My data reveals that, in the Andoque case, the connection between the dolphin and Whites is not the
vertical one of metaphor, but the horizontal one of continuity between the domain of human-nonhuman
interactions and that of inter-human relations. As we saw in Chapter 9, the dolphin is not the sole
nonhuman entity preying on humans through confusion and seduction. Other beings, such as the
earthworm, deer, tapir, and fi’du beings, which do not exhibit any apparent connection to Whites, share
similar modes of action. Likewise, the consequences of consubstantiality with dolphins are not unique
but rather continuous with the Andoque’s discourse on illnesses as predation and familiarization by
nonhumans, which the Andoque perceive as real dangers and as continuous with unfavorable
interactions with human beings. Therefore, instead of being a simple metaphor from the nonhuman
realm for an external object—i.e., assimilation into the non-Indigenous society—interaction with
dolphins serve as transducers, converting the ontology of inter-human relations into that of humannonhuman relations, and vice versa. Consequently, we should consider becoming White and
440

incorporation into the non-Indigenous society and economy as one pathway through which individuals
risk falling prey to nonhumans and losing the human body that distinguishes them from the world of
nonhuman potential affines. This is indeed the message conveyed by T5 on the boat of goods:
assimilation into the non-Indigenous economy and enchantment by their commodities would result in
familiarizing predation by nonhumans.
The notion of continuity between interactions with non-Indigenous agents and the relations with
nonhuman entities also appears to underlie a common critique directed towards maloqueros. This
critique centers around the funding of their malocas or specific ceremonial dances, either by the
Colombian government or through projects involving state or other non-Indigenous agencies. As
explored in previous chapters, this critique may imply that the maloquero in question lacks the necessary
knowledge to manage a maloca or conduct dances, or that they cannot secure the required manpower for
maloca construction and operation without monetary incentives. However, such external funding not
only reflects inadequate ritual or leadership skills but may also lead to adverse consequences. Upon
witnessing the proliferation of illnesses and violent incidents following a certain dance, several
interlocutors attributed these misfortunes to the fact that the initiative and resources for organizing the
dance came from outside the territory. Allegedly, they were linked to the project in which that
maloquero and their family members participated, rather than arising from their own commitment to
tradition. While the dance organizers consistently claimed the opposite, it seems that the underlying
critique suggests that deviation by non-kin others in the form of the resources they grant the maloquero
and his group members can leave them vulnerable to predation by nonhuman potential affines,
manifested in such misfortunes.
Despite the existence of various strategies of diverse means to manage and control exchange with
Whites to counteract predation by agents associated with the river mouth, it would be erroneous to infer
that the Andoque are satisfied with this exchange. Andoque members frequently point to numerous
accidents, violent conflicts, and internal disorder as indicators that this exchange is not effectively
managed. As mentioned earlier, there has been a decline in the practice of the River Turtle-Bamboo
Dance in recent decades, and in general, dances—including the River Turtle-Carrier Band and the
caguana distribution rituals preceding the major dances—are held less frequently than many believe they
should be. According to Fisi, the strategic narration of M5 and the spiritual dialogue and ritual offerings
to Lady Counting are no longer performed today as they were in Yiñékɒ’s days, because exchange with
Whites ceased being collective and managed by the captains or cacique. Similar to the other myths,
441

narrating it in inappropriate settings or without adequate offerings amounts to a careless invocation of
powerful nonhuman entities who will consequently seek out the narrator and their kins. However, Fisi’s
statement cannot be separated from his general idealization of captaincy during his father’s period and
his lamentation of contemporary political fragmentation among the Andoque. Other elders and clan
captains, who know this story as well and often hint to it, did not share similar statements with me. The
widespread perception of this myth as a framework to understanding exchanges with Whites suggests
that Andoque individuals draw, or may draw, on its elements to navigate such exchanges on smaller
scales. On various occasions, my interlocutors used the precedent of exchange of ritual substances set in
the story to legitimize today’s consumption of alcohol and cigarettes by the Andoque, on the one hand,
and the sale of coca powder and tobacco paste to Whites, on the other. It may thus also be the case that
the advantage that the elements from the river source give to the figures from the center over the river
mouth in this myth empowers them in their personal dealings with non-Indigenous merchants, settlers,
and entrepreneurs.
Nonetheless, in line with Fisi’s argument concerning the contextual boundaries for the effective
narration of M5, I propose that another transformation from Yiñékɒ’s period to today, which may limit
the effectiveness of M5, is the increased monetization of the Andoque’s trade with Whites. While many
interlocutors emphasize Yiñékɒ’s pivotal role in negotiating the exchange of rubber for manufactured
goods with the rubber bosses Miguel and later Alberto Zumaeta, a closer examination of accounts
provided by Andoque elders reveals that the exchange operated on an individual basis. Yiñékɒ’s role
was primarily to supervise the distribution of goods, which occurred mainly in his maloca, and to ensure
through spiritual and ritual means that the received goods benefit his personnel. Male Andoque members
had personal accounts with the Zumaeta bosses, with as much as 2/3 of the value of rubber they
collected during a fábrico covering the goods—particularly food and clothes—advanced to them during
the same fábrico (Guzmán Gonzalez 1971, 106–07). Money primarily served as a unit of account,
translating the value of imported goods into that of exported rubber (C-M-C), with the bosses charging
their workers higher prices for the goods they imported and purchasing rubber from them for
significantly lower prices than the ones they would get in the city. Upon settling their debts, the workers
could decide if they preferred to receive the remaining difference—if there was any—in cash or kind.
The payment was given to adult male workers on an individual basis, even though the work often
involved the collaboration of their family members, such as spouses and relatively grown children.
While a substantial portion of the debt represented goods advanced for the benefit of the entire family,
442

male workers often chose to spend their cash income within a few days on drinking in Puerto Santander
(ibid, 106). This way, as Guzmán observed, money functioned “as a hidden wheel within the social
organization” (ibid, ibid; my translation). The monetization of Indigenous economic activities in the
Araracuara sector progressed slowly until as late as the mid-1990s, when it was explored by Griffiths,
who documented how the Zumaeta family, the leading fish merchants whose payments represented a
major income source in the region, kept advancing credit in kind to their fishermen (1998, 225–26) (they
still do so today, but mostly in relation to fishing equipment).
Andoque members frequently compare money to vegetal salt, because, as the currency and medium of
communication in the Whites’ world, it mirrors the role that vegetal salt—which is paradigmatic of other
ritual substances—plays in their ancestral territory among humans and nonhumans. (Some note that
while salt once held this role exclusively, it is no longer considered an acceptable form of payment in
most transactions among people today—money has taken its place). However, this analogy does not
seem to be rooted in mythology, and, as far as I know, money does not appear at all in Andoque myths.
The term for money in Andoque is ḭ́ ̰ɒ́ nnkóba, which literally means “the round, disc-shaped thing of a
necklace.” Andoque elders recount that their mothers and grandmothers used to carry necklaces with
money coins that they would pierce and use as charms and pendants. “When the Whites started bringing
bills here, the old ladies got rid of their coins,” Fisi told me. “I picked up the coins that my mother
threw, fixed them, and bought myself candy in the village. When they first got the coins, they didn’t
know what money served for. And we still don’t know,” he chuckled. “If we knew, you wouldn’t see us
drinking in the village like that.” By that comment, Fisi referred to the frequent spending habits of
Andoque men of all ages, and to a lesser extent, women, who often use their earnings from the sale of
game, local products, or work for NGOs, state agencies, or settlers to engage in binge drinking sessions
with their family and friends. I will not explore this phenomenon further here,157 except to note that
while such practices may reflect the Andoque’s tendency to share surplus wealth with kin, reinforcing
social bonds, Andoque members, including the drinkers themselves when sober, criticize the behavior.

157
This phenomenon, documented among other Indigenous peoples in Amazonia and elsewhere (Langdon 2005), can be
attributed to a variety of factors into which I cannot delve exhaustively here. Besides the tendency to share surplus wealth,
these reasons encompass the irregularity of cash income and the difficulty of saving money in the absence of a regional
banking system. In the Araracuara sector, the proximity of the settler village and integration into its economy on one hand,
coupled with the historical trauma of the rubber genocide on the other, may also play key roles in shaping patterns of alcohol
consumption.

443

They recognize its link to domestic and general violence, as well as a waning commitment to ceremonial
life. Notably, “to be drunk” is expressed with the verb yi, which also means to die or become ill.
Examining this matter within the framework of myth and ritual as explained above, it becomes apparent
that money exists outside the system where the captain and elders transform “deviating things” into
“working tools.” The absence of money in M5, where it is not presented as another object created by
Lady Counting and appropriated by Egret of the River Mouth, might explain why Andoque members
find it challenging to manage money, as they themselves often state. We can conceptualize money as the
economic equivalent of the fi’du entities, who are more dangerous than other nonhuman entities
precisely because they resist symbolization. Just as coins limit the agency of money by lending it
visibility (Graeber 2001, 91–115), incorporating it into mythology could potentially tame it, allowing for
strategies of symbolic manipulation akin to those used with work tools or alcoholic drinks. This might
lead to people having a better capacity for handling money in ways they find satisfactory. In essence,
while Egret of the Center’s provision of three ritual substances to his rival in M5, compared to the
latter’s provision of only two, granted him a surplus and advantage of agency, the absence of money
from this myth reflects a surplus of “the Real,” in Lacan’s terms, which, in actual economic transactions,
is often readily converted into alcohol.158 Reflecting on the analogy drawn by Andoque members
between money and vegetal salt, we note that in contrast with the latter substance—whose agency is
tamed in M13 by the hero who recognizes a plant where other figures perceive a person, and whose
preparation includes elaborate etiquette aimed at transforming it into a semen-like element allowing its
producer to familiarize human and nonhuman beings—money remains a perilous agent from the affinal
outside.159
In summary, in this chapter I have examined the Andoque’s perceptions of non-Indigenous agents as
predatory and inimical, as well as their strategic, though not always enacted, responses to mitigate
associated dangers and to foster more reciprocal, marital-like exchange. In short, to assume an upriver

During my fieldwork, I recorded 46 instances of relatively large payments (COP$50,000 [approx. €11], or more) made to
Andoque individuals for their products, game, or services in the villages of Puerto Santander or Araracuara during my stays
in the settlements of these individuals. This provided me with an opportunity to question them about or directly observe how
they handled these revenues. In 22 of these instances, the earners, primarily men, spent all or most of the revenue on
alcoholic drinks for themselves, their friends, and relatives, and returned to their settlements in a state of intoxication on the
same day or one or more days later.
159
Importantly, my brief discussion here is confined to the Andoque’s perception of money as mismanaged and their own
association between its mismanagement and alcohol consumption. It is not meant to critique Indigenous use of money against
an assumed standard of effective financial literacy or healthy consumption patterns prevalent in non-Indigenous populations.
158

444

position towards them, rather than a downriver one. I have also demonstrated how engaging with nonIndigenous societies and their goods could undermine the Andoque’s status in power dynamics with
nonhuman entities within their ancestral territory. In the next chapter, I address further risks in trading
with Whites that derive from what the Indigenous party surrenders in this trade—specifically, persons or
things that are animated or governed by powerful owner-persons.

445

446

Chapter 13. Trading the Persons of the Land
Similar to other People of the Center (Cure 2020, 176; Lucas 2019, 32), the Andoque view their recent
history as a sequence of periods, or tiempos, each named after the main resource that they extracted and
traded with Whites during that time. The periods, in chronological order, are: the era of slavery (ending
in the nineteenth century, possibly starting as early as the seventeenth [Pineda Camacho and Llanos
1982; Pineda Camacho 1985]); rubber extraction (la cauchería), including labor for Casa Arana from the
early twentieth century to the 1930s (also referred to as el tiempo de Perú/de los Peruanos) and
subsequently with the independent Zumaetas until the 1970s; trading ocelot and other animal pelts in the
1970s (la tigrillada), mainly by one family; cocaine production in the 1980s (sometimes called el tiempo
de la mafia); and gold mining in the 2000s (la minería). Additionally, several economic activities have
not been limited to specific periods and continue today or have not been predominant enough to
delineate their own tiempos—these include commercial fishing that began in the 1970s, environmental
and cultural preservation projects starting in the 1990s, and coca powder sales from the mid-2010s
onward.
How does the Andoque’s participation in these economic activities affect their relations with the
nonhuman entities they involve? As Brightman argued in relation to plants, the trade in nonhuman
entities in Amazonia should be examined against the backdrop of local perceptions of such entities as
persons (2008, 153–54). In the Andoque case, for instance, economic engagement with Whites and their
intermediaries began precisely with the active trade of human persons, sold to merchants from
downriver as slaves by captains who were either their captors, their former protectors, or even nonagnatic kin. My analysis in this chapter is guided by Gow’s insight that for Indigenous Amazonians
history is kinship—the time in which kinship ties are formed and dissolved and what gives them
meaning (Gow 1991, 3). Therefore, in line with this dissertation’s interest in the Andoque’s power
relations with both human and nonhuman beings, I focus in this chapter on the ways in which kinship
processes of familiarization and affinization with nonhuman persons have unfolded in the different
extractive periods and were affected by the different economic activities. Considering the example of the
slave trade, the rise of this activity and the concurrent decline of anthropophagic rituals meant that
yielding orphans and captives to enslavement also implied the loss of support of powerful nonhuman
entities, whose wisdom and capacities were accessed through the cannibalistic consumption of such
individuals. This may be the first instance in the Andoque’s history where exchange with Whites came
at the expense of exchange with, and familiarization of, nonhuman entities.
447

Ethnographers of animist Indigenous peoples in Asia have found a decline in animist dispositions in
certain economic conditions, like altered access to means of production among Vietnam’s Katuic (N.
Århem 2014), or departure from immediacy in the production-consumption nexus among India’s
Nayaka (Naveh and Bird-David 2014). As we will see, the accounts collected among the Andoque
reveal not a reduction in animist sentiments but an increased sense of threat from the animated
nonhuman entities sharing their territory, with whom their ability to negotiate is diminishing. In
Amazonia, anthropologists have offered only limited analyses of how Indigenous people perceive their
own involvement in extractive activities and the methods for safely engaging in them, as opposed to
Indigenous views on unrestrained extractive practices by outsiders (e.g., Tilkin Gallois 1987; 1990).
Researchers’ neglect of Indigenous perceptions of how certain economic activities affect their
relationships with the nonhuman entities involved in these activities is starkly evident in the case of the
commodification of medicinal and psychotropic plants, such as ayahuasca. These plants are typically
regarded as animated or under the ownership of powerful spirits, engaging in dialogue with whom is
deemed essential for achieving various objectives. Nevertheless, ethnographers have largely overlooked
how such economic activities affect these crucial dialogues (e.g., Homan 2017; Meneses 2020;
Slaghenauffi 2020).
In this chapter, I delve into several extractive activities engaged in by the Andoque, not necessarily
following the chronological order of their occurrence. My discussion centers on how these activities
have influenced the Andoque’s dynamics of power with the nonhuman entities within their territory.
Firstly, I explore activities that have provoked retaliatory predation by the owner-persons of the
resources extracted, placing this predation within a triangular framework of predatory actions involving
the Andoque, non-Indigenous peoples, and nonhuman entities. Secondly, I address activities that have
threatened people’s mastery over the traded entities, often with wider consequences for managing power
relationships with other nonhuman beings and both Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. Focusing on
coca powder commerce, I deploy the etic distinction between gifts and commodities, as well as the emic
differences between pets and orphans regarding their degree of agency and alienability, to elucidate the
Andoque’s ambivalent position in this complex web of power relations.

448

The Predatory Triangle of Extractivism
I will commence my discussion with the extractive activity associated with the most significant and
devastating catastrophe to have ever impacted the Andoque people—namely, rubber tapping, certain
dimensions of which I discussed in Chapter 4. Prior to the emergence of the rubber economy in the
Caquetá-Putumayo region, the Andoque utilized the elastic latex from various plants to cover the sticks
used to beat the manguaré drums or attach tree barks or feathers to their bodies as ornaments (Pineda
Camacho 1982, 48). Nevertheless, the extensive exploitation of rubber trees (Hevea guianensis and
Hevea benthamiana) under the directives of the Casa Arana posed significant risks. In her thesis on
Andoque gold mining, Audren cites Levy, who advocated for the legalization of mining and the
inclusion of ritual activities during excavations (see below). Levy referred to the rubber genocide,
stating “It wasn’t rubber tapping [la cauchería] that ate the Andoque, but the territory” (2017, 107). In
conversations about the Casa Arana era, other interlocutors echoed similar sentiments, suggesting that
the excessive exploitation of rubber trees by the Andoque triggered a retaliatory response from the
owner-persons of the territory, resulting in the Casa Arana’s brutal violence. Indeed, during that period,
rubber was collected by making numerous deep incisions into the tree trunk with a machete (Robuchon
2010, 118), leading to the tree’s deterioration after multiple harvests and the subsequent depletion of its
latex. In my conversation with Fisi and his son Nestor about that time (C1 in the Appendix 2), they
attributed the violent behavior of the company agents both to their late arrival in the Andoque territory,
allegedly after suffering losses inflicted by other Indigenous groups who wrongfully blamed the
Andoque, and to the captains’ lack of familiarity with M5 on the origin of trade. On another occasion,
they explained to me that, by contrast, Yiñékɒ possessed the knowledge to manage interactions with the
Whites. He enforced the Andoque’s ritual calendar on Miguel Zumaeta, ensuring that his men could
cultivate gardens and partake in dances appropriately. More importantly, Yiñékɒ symbolically
manipulated the wild trees from which latex was to be extracted because he was familiar with (and it is
possible that he even elaborated) the final episode of M5 (for the full myth, see Appendix 1):
Trader Egret of the River Mouth returned to his home and then came back to the center, bringing a harpy eagle with
him. He pulled out rubber (tekámn) from the eagle’s nostrils and stretched it. “With this you need to pay (ɵpáhai)
me,” he said. Egret of the Center thought about how he could obtain that material, when his younger son said: “I saw
something similar in the manioc garden, which also stretches like that.” He took them to the garden, broke a manioc
stick and showed them the sap. “This is rubber,” Egret of the Center named this material. “This is how we are going to

449

work from now on,” said Trader Egret of the River Mouth, “this is how you are going to pay (ɵpáhai) me”. This is
how the exchange with the Whites started.

Nestor and Fisi explained that one significant measure undertaken by Yiñékɒ to safeguard the Andoque
during the post-genocide rubber-tapping period, involved the transformation of wild rubber trees (teka)
into manioc plants (pánn) during ritual and mambeadero sessions. This transformation was based on the
physical resemblance between the latex of rubber trees and the sap of manioc plants.160 The association
between rubber and manioc also appears in Andoque dream interpretation. Whereas dreaming of rubber
foretells the shedding of human blood—possibly due to the suffering and extermination caused by the
Casa Arana—an Andoque rubber gatherer’s dream of manioc plants served as a guide to locating rubber
trees for exploitation. Based on these dreams, gatherers could then lead their colleagues to these
valuable resources. The symbolic transformation of rubber into manioc can be seen as an act of
familiarization, where a wild resource from the forest’s affinal domain is converted into a domestic
plant, in relation to which humans play certain parental roles—caretakers, protectors, and guarantors of
reproduction—and hold the important position of legitimate consumers. Similar to a human gardener
acting as the captain of his cultivars and being able to dispose of them as “orphans,” naming rubber trees
after the manioc plant made it safer, in Andoque eyes, to exploit and exchange their latex, because it
eliminated any potential claims to ownership and objections from the owner-persons of the territory.
Depending on demand, the Zumaeta bosses sought to produce latex not only from Hevea trees but also
from balata (Castilla ulei) and juansoco (Couma macrocarpa) trees. Interestingly, while the Andoque’s
spiritual management of rubber tapping made it safer than during the Casa Arana period, as it was now
considered their legitimate “property” rather than that of the forest’s owner-persons, the later period was
also marked by greater ecological sustainability. This sustainability was achieved through the use of
scrapers that allowed for shallow grating of the tree bark, enabling the trunk to regenerate within several
days. Each worker maintained several “trails” connecting to “his” rubber trees, with a rotation system
where each day the worker would visit the trees along one trail, leaving to rest those along the other
trails. While my interlocutors did not explicitly suggest this interpretation, we can draw an analogy
between these work technique and routine—which were probably imposed by the rubber boss—and

As observed by S. Hugh-Jones (pers. comm., January 2024), rubber and manioc indeed share common qualities, being
euphorbias with edible fruit or tubers requiring the removal of poison prior to consumption.

160

450

women’s replanting of manioc sticks as propagules after uprooting tubers attached to them, allowing for
the plant’s regeneration and future yield. In a sense, the rubber trail became the worker’s “garden.”
The transactions in M5 and the exploitation of natural resources on which they rely serve as blueprint
for later trade and extractivism. After Fisi finished the narration of this myth as it is presented above, he
continued with this short monolog in Andoque:
They paid (ɵpáhai) the axe with rubber. Ever since, we were to negotiate (dohai) everything, even cassava [laughing].
It was said that we were to negotiate trees. We were to negotiate animals, [paying their owner-persons] ambíl for the
value (ɵpáhakn móna̰) of the animal. Everything we negotiate, we must present ambíl, coca, and manicuera as
offerings (ɵtasé), provide the value (ɵpáha) of the animal. This is the offering (ḭtaséa), this way you can seize it
[game]. This is how we can seize gold here, with offerings (taséa). It is not complicated for us, no one can do us any
harm for doing it. This is what we do not know [how to actually do it today?], this is why the owner [of gold] gives us
anger.

Trade involving nonhuman entities with outsiders thus depends on ɵpáha offerings to placate the
entities’ owner-persons. These offerings aim to replace the harvested entity with vegetal substances of
similar value, and ḭtasé offerings are made to convince these powerful guardians to agree to this
heterosubstitutive exchange, instead of taking revenge through homosubstitutive predation. This
acquiescence to exchange can be interpreted, to some extent, as the enlistment of the owner-persons as
“pets” or “companions” of the offeror. However, as Nestor and Fisi explained to me on another
occasion, not all resources are equal in how easily their owner-persons can be appeased. Rubber
gathering could be managed effectively, and the territory’s owner-persons could be appeased for its
extraction, because rubber is a vegetal material, and as such—even as a wild tree—was made for human
use. By contrast, the large-scale harvesting of fish and animals, which possess greater agency, for
commercial purposes could not be easily compensated in the eyes of their owner-persons. Such actions
would only be tolerated if they were committed in the context of a ceremonial dance.
In the previous chapter, I alluded to the first economic activity reported by my interlocutors, where
faunal beings were harvested for trade with Whites—namely, the massive fishing in the Caquetá River
by the Cacambra and Spix’s Guan Clans as narrated in T5. Whether this activity unfolded exactly as the
Andoque describe it is of limited importance to our current discussion, as it serves as a cautionary tale
among contemporary Andoque, underscoring the fatal consequences of the excessive exploitation of
nonhuman entities. The image of the dolphin as an attractive sexual predator and the seductive
techniques employed by the sailor-dolphins to lure the members of these two clans onto the ill-fated boat
451

convey the idea that extensive harvesting of nonhuman potential affines leads to the mass affinization of
human beings, integrating them into the nonhuman domain.
Besides this ancient and historically questionable fishing bonanza, the Andoque have been involved in
fishing and hunting for commercial purposes at varying intensities since the establishment of the
Araracuara Penal Colony in 1938, which purchased game from neighboring Indigenous communities. In
the 1960s, Joselito of the Eagle Clan and his sons, following the unfortunate passing of his son Agustín
during rubber tapping (as described in Chapter 4), became pioneers in dedicating themselves to fishing
for sale. They resorted to salting their catch due to the absence of a cold storage facility. In the 1970s,
such a facility was introduced by Lisardo Zumaeta, who thus inaugurated the commercial fishing, a
venture in which many Andoque have participated ever since. In the 1980s, Alberto Zumaeta followed
suit, launching his own fishing initiative in the Caquetá (which he later closed down), and other
merchants joined Lisardo, along with his son and grandson who inherited his business in subsequent
years. Today, the core group of fishermen who derive their livelihood from harvesting fish in Araracuara
rapids and selling them to merchants, who then export them to Bogotá, consists primarily of nonAndoque residents of Puerto Santander and Araracuara. However, many Andoque men also sell fish to
these merchants with a frequency varying according to seasonal availability and economic needs.
Additionally, many individuals occasionally sell fish and certain types of game, such as tapirs, peccaries,
and paca, to settlers, soldiers, and Indigenous residents of Araracuara and Puerto Santander. However,
these occasional sales do not constitute a full-time pursuit.
In light of the discussion in Chapter 9 regarding the vengeful responses by animals and their ownerpersons to overhunting and overfishing, it should come as no surprise that the practice of harvesting
animals for commercial purposes is viewed as perilous. Andoque members explain that such activities
would only be tolerated by the owner-persons of fish and game if conducted in moderation to provide
sustenance and meet the immediate needs of the hunter and their family. The members of various
families, except for Joselito’s descendants, attribute the untimely deaths of many of his sons and some of
his grandsons to their involvement in commercial fishing. Many members also express concerns about
potential retaliation from the site-person of Araracuara rapids and other owner-persons of fish due to
excessive fishing, but, in the same breath, they acknowledge the need to meet their families’ necessities.

452

In this respect, the predation by Whites discussed in the previous chapter, reflected, inter alia, in the
asymmetrical exchange that the Andoque maintain with them, leads to the Andoque’s excessive
predation on nonhuman beings in the form of hunting, fishing, and exploitation of other resources,
which leads, in turn, to the predation of Andoque members by nonhumans as revenge. These dynamics
are illustrated by the following figure:

Figure 26. The triangle of Indigenous, non-Indigenous, and nonhuman predation in the Andoque territory

Yet, people’s financial mismanagement and their allocation of earnings to reckless spending, such as
drinking binges, also play a role in this context. An elderly woman with whom I stayed expressed worry
of her son’s tendency to spend his earning from sales of game on alcohol, that leads him to hunt more in
the hope of providing for his children. Once, when he was out searching white-lipped peccaries several
days after selling a large amount of meat and drinking with the money he had earned, she told his son in
my presence, alluding to the risk of animal transformation in M18 (Appendix 1): “This is why one keeps
the money, not to kill [animals] every day; don’t you see that the father of peccaries confused them?”
While the surest way to avoid such retaliation is to refrain from engaging in overexploitation in the first
place, my interlocutors mentioned the organization of the Peach Palm Dance as a means to mitigate
potential reprisals. The narrators of T5 made note of the captain of the Cacambra Clan, who, sensing

453

danger, chose to climb a tree by the harbor instead of embarking with his men. From this vantage point,
he witnessed the boat leaving the port and eventually sinking. Subsequently, he retraced the course of
the Macaw River in the opposite direction, running upriver to warn other clans about the catastrophe he
had just witnessed. Upon hearing his report, the captain of the Pɵ’pɵdɨ Frog Clan organized the Peach
Palm Dance (No̰ḛpa Nni), whose songs, particularly those belonging to the part of mask performances
(Pɨdapódi, or “Tar Face”), the Pɵ’pɵdɨ captain had learned from peoples living downriver, in the Lower
Caquetá and the tributaries of the Apaporis River, such as the Letuama, Tanimuka, and Macuna.
Nonetheless, according to my interlocutors, these peoples, in turn, learned the myth commemorated in
this dance from the Andoque.
This myth, whose reenactment in the dance serves to mitigate affinization by the owner-persons of fish,
tells the story of Capybara (Sɒ̰’ḛ ́ ), who stole the peach palm fruit from his aquatic brothers-in-law during
a visit to his in-laws downriver (M29; Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 190–201). Capybara’s theft was
made possible with the help of his fish-wife, who concealed one pit in her vagina, bringing it back with
them to the center for planting. They managed to plant the pit only after spilling the dough of already
grated peach palm fruits into the river, tempting Capybara’s in-laws to swim upstream, where he killed
them by asphyxiation. In the dance—a Yucuna version of which I attended with several Andoque
companions—masked dancers impersonate various harmful aquatic and non-aquatic animals, including
dolphins. They mock-assault female dance attendants, directing oversized wooden phalluses toward
their vaginas—the place where the primordial fish-woman kept the coveted pit. The dancers only cease
their actions once the women compel them to consume large quantities of (non-alcoholic) peach palm
beer, a man-made derivative that allows humans to maintain control over the raw material from which it
is prepared. Following this “Tar Face” (P¦d́ apódi) part, other song-dances commemorate additional
aspects and episodes from the story, particularly the fish’s asphyxiation (see also Pineda Camacho
1976). Singing and providing peach palm beer to these beings ensure their departure from the maloca
without retaliating against the human participants. One interlocutor also explained that by disguising
themselves as fish and other nonhuman beings, the dance participants mislead the malevolent entities
downstream into believing that they resemble them and should not be attacked.
In one mambeadero session, Fisi and his son Nestor explained to me that the defensive effects of the
Peach Palm Dance held by the Pɵ’pɵdɨ Clan captain linger today, protecting the Andoque from
retaliation by the owner-persons of fish, but this defense is not everlasting and will eventually expire.

454

They said that Yiñékɒ tried to organize this dance twice to learn and teach the younger generation how
to hold it appropriately, and Fisi later organized two such dances in collaboration with a Yucuna man.
Despite this effort, they lamented that while some of today’s elders have learned the Andoque songs of
the dance, none of the members knows the song-dances of the Tar Face part, making it unlikely for a
complete future dance of this category to be organized.
While the harvest and trade of fauna present a more uncertain endeavor than those of flora, which can, in
principle, be managed to allay its owner-persons, Andoque members hold contrasting views regarding
the possibility of reconciling with the guardian spirits of the territory in the context of a relatively recent
extractive activity in which many of them were involved between 2000 and 2017, namely, gold mining.
This requires a short description of the Andoque’s involvement in this economic bonanza, which can be
divided into four periods: the first gold rush (2000–2003), the Andoque’s fluvial mining (2005–2009),
the second gold rush (2009–2013), and the Andoque’s legalization efforts (2013–2017). This economic
activity involved several women from the community who worked as raft cooks, and the majority of
men whose ages ranged from 20 to 50 years old when I arrived in 2018. The participation in gold
mining, much like rubber tapping for their parents and grandparents, was a significant and defining
experience for an entire generation in the Araracuara sector.
Initially, gold mining was conducted in rivers and operated from rafts. The first gold rush (2000–2003)
coincided with the increased influence that the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces-People’s Army
(FARC-EP) exerted on the area from its seat in the Demilitarized Zone of San Vicente del Caguán. The
rafts operating during that period were predominantly owned and managed by Brazilian miners who
employed relatively few Andoque men. They also paid taxes to the dissident group and to the
Indigenous communities in whose reserves they operated. This mining boom, like the one of 2009–
2013, attracted workers, merchants, and prostitutes to the region, and resulted in rising prices for food,
gasoline, and other goods (Romero Mendoza 2016, 62). When it began, this mining activity was
informal but not strictly illegal. It was eventually categorized as such as part of stricter regulation on
extractive activities, which led to the creation of the Mining Code of 2001 (Audren 2017, 41).
When the Colombian army regained control of the region in 2003, the rafts were abandoned, and many
Brazilian miners returned to their home country or were expelled. However, two years later, two
Brazilian miners returned to the Andoque territory. They became bosses for some Andoque members

455

and business partners for others, sharing their knowledge and experience. Several Andoque individuals
took hold of abandoned rafts that remained hidden in the region, equipped them, and ran their own
fluvial mining operations. During this second period, mining occurred without pressure from the FARCEP and with the consent of the military stationed in Araracuara. When one of the Brazilian miners
passed away in 2006, a member of the Zumaeta family, who resided in Bogotá, partnered with an
Andoque raft owner and invested in his raft. This marked yet another extractive activity carried out by
the Andoque and involving the Zumaeta family.
During that period, and to a somewhat lesser extent during the mining booms before and after it, gold
mining was regulated by the Andoque community, although my interlocutors had differing views on the
effectiveness of this regulation. In order to distribute work and benefits among as many members and
families as possible, shifts on the rafts had specific durations and rotations. However, some interlocutors
complained that they or their relatives received fewer shifts than others. The taxes collected by the
cabildo had various purposes, including supporting the community school, conducting internal
assemblies, assisting members during medical treatments in the city, and acquiring resources for the
cabildo, such as boats. At times, these funds were simply distributed among the families. Nonetheless,
my interlocutors mentioned that tax collection was not always rigorous, and the funds were occasionally
diverted from their intended purposes by cabildo members, who allegedly used them for drinking
parties. More generally, my interlocutors unanimously highlighted the issue of excessive alcohol
consumption and the resulting violence during that period. Many of those who worked on rafts or owned
them reported that, despite earning relatively high profits from this activity, they often spent most of
their earnings on alcohol. While some used their profits to purchase outboard motors, electric
appliances, build houses, or send their children to study in the city, alcohol remained a significant
temptation. To address this issue, the elders and cabildo attempted to impose sanctions on
troublemakers, primarily through work suspensions, but with limited success.
In 2009, the Andoque’s social and work regulations and tax collection were disrupted by another gold
rush. Large numbers of Brazilian and Colombian miners and raft owners flocked to the Middle Caquetá,
with many of them concentrating their efforts near Araracuara. This second boom came to an end
following a military operation in 2013, but some Andoque members continued mining both within and
outside their territory until shortly before my arrival. In these later years of fluvial gold mining, several
Andoque raft owners and workers faced arrests and incarceration. During my initial months of

456

fieldwork, a raft was positioned in front of one of the clan settlements, and several members of that clan
expressed their intention to resume work on it. However, they did not proceed with this plan during my
stay, and the raft eventually sank.
In 2013, several Andoque individuals embarked on an endeavor to legalize gold mining, but this time on
land. This initiative was led by Levy and his father Tañe of the Sun Clan, who held the position of
governor at that time. It consisted of three interrelated efforts: 1) obtaining the title of “Indigenous
Mining Zone” for up to 98% of the Indigenous Reserve Andoque de Aduche on the north bank of the
Caquetá; 2) securing two individual mining concessions; 3) and obtaining permanent mining permits for
Duxon, a Colombian company headed by Orlando Andoque of the Sun Clan and his cousin Carlos
Zumaeta (son of Alberto), with financial backing from a Canadian investor (Audren 2017, 22). Starting
in 2014, Duxon hired Andoque workers to carry out excavation work within a specified area in
Araracuara, under a temporary mining permit. The purpose of this endeavor was to confirm the presence
of gold deposits in the region and demonstrate the company’s profitability. As the family affiliations
mentioned earlier suggest, members of the Sun Clan, particularly Levy, played a central role and were
the primary advocates of this initiative. In contrast, most other Andoque members remained (and still
are) largely undecided (ibid, 47). Throughout a series of community assemblies, meetings with the
National Mining Agency, and consultations with non-governmental environmental organizations,
Andoque members vacillated between supporting the legalization initiative and opposing it. Eventually,
they suspended the titling request a few days before my arrival in April 2018. Even Levy, who spoke
enthusiastically to me about gold mining in May of that year, redirected his efforts toward carbon offsets
only a few months later—an economic activity precluding large-scale mining operations.
We can now return from this historical digression to our discussion on the risks that extractive activities
pose to the Andoque’s power relations with nonhumans. Despite widespread Andoque involvement in
gold mining, many individuals, including former miners, describe this activity as highly hazardous.
They point to numerous accidents and illnesses that befell those engaged in it, as well as the overall
violence and disorder during that period, viewing these hardships as the retribution from the ownerpersons of gold and the territory for the harm caused by this activity. Despite Fisi’s earlier quote that the
owner-persons can potentially be appeased for gold mining, on other occasions he explained that this
only applies to the extraction of small quantities and for limited durations to meet specific needs,
because mythology, particularly M5, does not contain any direct hints for the possibility of mining gold,

457

as it does for tapping rubber. As his son Nestor explained, the earth was intended for humans to cultivate
crops, bury the dead, and excavate stone axes and clay to craft various utensils. These activities were
only permitted after specific and intricate offerings were made. Gold, on the other hand, was not created
for human use. Some people mention that the elders initially disapproved of mining due to these
concerns. However, the disapproval waned due to fear of the foreign, unknown miners and the guerilla
which backed the activity at different moments, and once the elders too began to enjoy some of the
profits, either in the form of taxes or the wages earned by their children. Fisi and his sons likewise said
that when the fluvial mining began, community members initially envisioned working only during the
dry season when the river water level is low, rather than during the wet season. This seasonal
arrangement was seen as a way to appease the owner-persons of gold and the territory.161 However, the
influx of non-Indigenous miners and the enthusiasm of Indigenous workers led to year-round mining
operations.
However, for other Andoque members, gold mining is not entirely foreign to their mythology and
tradition, and they believe in the possibility of engaging in a spiritual dialog to safely extract it. For
example, Tañe and other members of the Sun Clan, the protagonists of the legalization and inland
mining project, do not view gold mining as a novelty that is opposed to “legitimate” extracted resources,
such as stone axes and clay. Instead, they consider these latter resources as precursors, whose excavation
in earlier periods predicted and justifies contemporary gold mining. Audren cites Levy as saying that the
Sun Clan holds the privilege to mine gold in Araracuara because it is the site where mythical Sun was
born (2017, 115). In one of our conversations, Levy claimed that gold mining is attested in mythology
through an episode from the story of the war between Sun and Moon. This episode, that I had never
encountered in the version published by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 45–55) or in any of the five
versions of the myth narrated to me by Andoque elders, involves Sun’s purchasing the wife of his
brother Moon in exchange for gold, which, according to Levy, must have been previously dug.
Another approach is exemplified by Rodolfo, Yiñékɒ’s son and a reputed healer who was given a name
in the “white” Fausiya Dance. In general, Rodolfo perceives non-renewable natural resources as
analogous to the blood and vital elements constituting the bodies of their respective owner-persons, who
would thus punish those who extract them without obtaining their permission. He attributes the death of

161

A similar arrangement was reported among the Waiãpi, see Tilkin Gallois 1990, 53.

458

an eighteen-year-old Andoque miner in 2010 to such a punishment, stating that the owner-person of gold
fomented anger among two more experienced miners, causing them to miss the calls of their young
colleague whose leg got trapped in the raft’s powerful suction machine while diving, until he finally
died (cf. Fisi’s comment above, “This [the offering to the gold’s owner-person] is what we do not know,
this is why the owner [of gold] gives us anger”). However, during the elaboration of the legalization
project, Rodolfo volunteered to negotiate with the owner-person of gold to ensure the safety of miners
and their kin and, during Duxon’s excavations, he oversaw work at the mining site and would halt
operations upon sensing the disapproval of these nonhuman entities to prevent harm to the miners.
Rodolfo once shared with me, while we were picking coca during my early months of fieldwork, that
during the initial project discussions, he remained silent until he communicated with the owner-person
of gold. The spirit revealed its consent to mining, stating that they could dig the earth, remove “stems”
(tallos) of gold, and plant them in Bogotá, thus selling them to Whites in COP$20,000 a stem (roughly
€4.5). However, under no circumstances should the excavated gold remain in the Andoque territory.
When I sought clarification, Rodolfo explained that gold occupies a role for its owner-person similar to
the one manioc holds for humans. Just as manioc plants grow from a stem taken from another plant, so
can gold be removed from Andoque soil and planted in Bogotá, where it would be taken care of by
Whites. Rodolfo emphasized that the gold should not remain in their territory, as he explained, “because
what can an Indian do with gold? We’ve never had gold; we had the axe.” Leaving excavated gold in
their territory would result in punishment from the owner-person causing various illnesses. In contrast,
the presence of gold would not harm the non-Indigenous inhabitants of Bogotá. On another occasion
while we were picking coca, Rodolfo slyly asked me: “Would you like to know the name of the owner
of gold?” Naturally, I wanted to. “Dui,” he responded and translated it as “Burner” (quemador). Rodolfo
said that they had formed a close bond (nos hicimos amigos), and now Dui would only communicate
with him, not with any other human being. Rodolfo added that the Andoque are the only Indigenous
people in the Caquetá-Putumayo region who can safely extract gold or any other non-renewable
resource because they are the only ones to have mined stone axes in the past, trading these axes for
various goods.
The parallel drawn by Rodolfo between gold and manioc echoes his father’s transformation of wild
rubber latex into the tame manioc sap in order to render its extraction safer for his men. However, rubber
was used by the Andoque before and independently of trade with non-Indigenous people, while Dui’s

459

sine qua non for mining gold was to export it from the territory. How can we understand this condition,
as well as the idea that, while endangering the Andoque, gold does not represent any risk for Whites?
In the Andoque language, gold is referred to as dónsɒ̰n, meaning “yellow sand,” and dú’sɒ̰n, “burned
sand.” Based on the latter and more current term, Orlando named the company he founded with Carlos
Zumaeta “Duxon,” infusing it with an Anglo-Saxon flavor that conveys an international business
orientation. Gold carries associations with fire: firstly, through the name of its owner-person Dui—an
element which is also shared with Whites, duiɵ́hɵ (“Burners”); and secondly, in one theory linking its
origin to the ashes of trees burned during the flood of fiery water, which remained underground. Gold is
also linked to the sun. In one myth, Sun’s son is captured by si’deknkn ants and taken into a tree trunk.
Sun burns the trunk, and its ashes become gunpowder. Subsequently, Sun encounters Fi’du, who
possesses a gun. Sun confiscates Fi’du’s gun and loads it with gunpowder. When this weapon reaches
humans, it becomes duidi—the gun of the river source. The river source, we may recall, indicates the
direction of the Andean cordillera, where Bogotá is located, and is associated with the “burner” type of
Whites. A detail from another myth, this time M6, adds further insight into the relationship between
gold, the sun, and Whites. This detail was shared with me by Orlando, who had learned it, in turn, from
Rodolfo during discussions about negotiations with the owner-person of gold. According to Orlando, the
fruits of the “stone tree,” which Sun kept in his garden to deceive and kill his daughter’s suitors, turned
into gold powder upon hitting the ground. I recall the reader that, in this myth, the suitor who overcame
Sun and safely felled the stone tree was Egret of the River Mouth, also known as Axe Egret because he
used his metal axe. This detail suggests that Whites—in their capacity as traders—are the legitimate
owners of the stone tree and the gold it produced, having overcome the first owner, Sun. Thus, gold,
which is owned by Whites in mythology but now found underground in the Andoque’s territory, may
occupy a diametrically opposed position compared to metal axes, which were initially owned by the
Andoque in mythology until they were usurped by Whites, who possess them in contemporary times.
Therefore, this detail from M6 may justify exporting gold to the river source in exchanges with Whites
who “use their metal axes” and occupy the role of traders from the river mouth, just as narrating M5
legitimizes the importation of metal axes (and other goods) into the center, and their safe use there.
Therefore, while gold can provoke the anger and violence associated with heat and fire among the
Andoque, it would not harm the Whites, who can “cultivate” it much like the Andoque cultivate manioc.

460

Whether my hypothesis is correct or not, the broader discussion of the Andoque’s engagement in gold
mining highlights the diverse perspectives that can emerge regarding the risk of predation by nonhuman
entities due to specific extractive activities, and the capacity that different individuals hold, or consider
possible, to draw upon mythology and past experiences as strategies for mitigating these risks. In the
forthcoming chapter, we will delve into additional facets of the Andoque’s gold mining endeavors,
revealing the extent to which these negotiations with nonhuman entities intersect with their interactions
with non-Indigenous entities, primarily the state. However, prior to exploring these aspects, we will shift
our focus in the next section to other extractive activities in which the Andoque have faced challenges
that are not related to predation by resource owner-persons, but rather concern their ability to familiarize
and thus enjoy the assistance of these resources.
Commodification: Between Losing Pets and Trading Orphans
The growing global appreciation of Indigenous cultures in recent decades, the recognition of the
environmental benefits of their ancestral knowledge in an era of ecological destruction, and the interest
in the substances produced by such peoples perceived as “authentic,” have led to the export of items
from the Andoque territory that differ from those discussed in the previous section. These items are not
raw materials but products crafted and prepared by the Andoque. I am primarily referring to Indigenous
knowledge and coca powder, the trade or sharing of which with to non-Indigenous agents are perceived
by the Andoque as posing a risk to their own capacity to benefit from these items.
Evidently, as a researcher who has traveled great distances and made specific career choices to study an
Indigenous people, the Andoque’s perspective on sharing their knowledge with outsiders held personal
significance for me. Some of the challenges associated with sharing certain types of data with
researchers can be deduced from the discussions in previous chapters regarding the Andoque’s concerns
about losing control over specific spells by teaching them to others, exposing themselves to external
threats by disclosing their origins, or invoking powerful nonhuman owner-persons without appropriate
offerings. For instance, my interlocutors mentioned that certain medicinal plants were no longer as
effective for several elders. They attributed this decline to their involvement a few years ago in a project
led by an Italian educational foundation dedicated to preserving traditional medicinal knowledge, in
which they provided information about various such plants. However, the participants in such research
typically hold a different perspective. Several participants in the ethnobotanical project assured me on

461

different occasions that they had only shared information with the researchers regarding plants for which
knowledge had already been widely distributed among the Indigenous population, and whose
effectiveness was no longer dependent on secrecy.
Participating in research projects organized by governmental and non-governmental agencies, as well as
collaborating with individual researchers, sometimes includes compensation. This leads some
Indigenous onlookers to assume that their fellows indiscriminately “sell” their knowledge when they
take part in research. Researchers, for their part, are often perceived as exploiting and profiting from the
information provided by their informants. The accumulation of knowledge by research institutions and
other agencies raises concerns that it could eventually be used against the Indigenous population. This
concern underpinned Fisi’s statement during the “cultural workshop for environmental management,”
where he expressed worry that the State might force him to carry out a ceremonial dance in a particular
season, based on the published Andoque ecological calendar (Chapter 8). Several interlocutors have
criticized the prevalent practice of not crediting specific individuals for the versions of myths and other
knowledge they contribute to publications. This results in researchers being viewed as the primary
source of knowledge, leading interested students to seek them out rather than the Indigenous elders who
originally shared this knowledge. Since traditional training includes the reciprocal exchange of food and
ritual substances from the apprentice to the teacher, the informant who cannot compete with the
published researcher is left impoverished and neglected. In essence, the researcher is accused of
expropriating the informant’s knowledge and detaching it from the social relations in which it is
embedded—similar to the perception of ethnographic research among other Amazonian peoples (e.g.,
Gongora 2016; de Vienne and Allard 2005).
For the Andoque, this expropriation is encoded in the image of the Head-Choppers, or cortacabezas.
This figure, widespread in Leticia and the Colombian Amazon, is a variation on the Andean figure of the
pishtaco, along with other monsters whose modes of action and aggressiveness serve as embodied
representations and parodies of colonial and capitalist injustices experienced by Indigenous peoples
(Ansión 1989; Burman 2018; Cure 2010; Gow 2001, 258–72; Magazine 2018; Santos Granero 1998,
137–38). My interlocutors asserted that the Head-Choppers had never arrived at their ancestral territory,
but shared with me testimonies that they had heard directly or indirectly from individuals from upriver,
in the Monochoa Indigenous Reserve, or from other Amazonians they had encountered. The HeadChoppers operate in several modes. They typically ambush solitary fishermen under the cover of night,

462

casting an intense, disorienting light from their aircraft—often likened to small flying saucers—leaving
their victims bewildered and vulnerable. They proceed to decapitate their victim, eviscerate their
abdomen, and extract the liver and heart, which they then replace with stacks of money. Such attacks
can also happen in gardens during the daytime and sometimes follow research conducted by
anthropologists or other scientists documenting people’s fishing practices or mapping garden locations.
The Head-Choppers are said to be gringos, whose exact nationality is unclear. “They come from where
you do: Americans, Japanese, Israelis,” one man told me. Several of their laboratories have been found
and their operations stopped thanks to guerilla intervention—while the Colombian army was allegedly
complicit in giving them a free hand in the areas it controlled.
People’s accounts of the Head-Choppers were almost always tinged with a mixture of concern,
uncertainty, and humor. Unlike with other mythical or historical accounts they shared, it was clear that
my interlocutors were ambivalent about the existence or real threat of these figures. They seemed to be
gauging my reaction to their stories, sometimes teasingly asking, “You’re not one of them, are you?”
When queried about the motives behind the Head-Choppers’ actions, my interlocutors suggested that
these beings sought to harvest Indigenous knowledge from their victims; one added that it might be part
of a grander scheme to create intelligent robots. Cure (2010) interprets the Head-Chopper rumors in
Leticia as emblematic of the perils posed by non-Indigenous foreigners in general and the ills of global
capitalism. However, the motives ascribed to the Head-Choppers and the targeted references to
anthropologists and other scientists suggest that for the Andoque—and potentially for the wider Middle
Caquetá region as well—this figure symbolizes the theft of Indigenous knowledge by outsiders, akin to
the Bolivian kharisiri (Burman 2018). This notion was echoed in a rumor an interlocutor recounted
about an Andoque elder with a “gringo son.” This elder, valued by Colombian and foreign researchers
for his mythological knowledge, was invited to a conference in New York, where he was allegedly
seduced by an American academic into sleeping with her and impregnating her. As the rumor has it, the
academic’s aim was to perform experiments on her child to extract the elder’s knowledge directly from
the child’s brain. While this rumor does not directly involve Head-Choppers, it is driven by the same
logic—that knowledge is physically stored and can be usurped from Indigenous individuals by outsiders
with a voracious appetite for this information.
The idea that knowledge can be thus usurped is at odds with the English expression “sharing
knowledge,” as used above. Teaching things to outsiders is not considered as sharing knowledge that is

463

consequently held by both parties, but as a total transfer of that knowledge from the Indigenous party to
the non-Indigenous one. This perspective became clear to me during my stay at one of the malocas,
when I read aloud from an ethnographic book about a dance held years earlier at another Andoque
maloca, in which my hosts had shown interest. As I read a section where the anthropologist mentioned
being taught by the maloquera how to make the manicuera beverage for dancers (but not for ritual
offerings), my hosts reacted strongly. They recalled an incident several years after the reported dance
where the same maloquera made a diluted manicuera that led to rain during a dance in their own maloca.
They concluded that by imparting the knowledge on manicuera preparation to the researcher, the
maloquera handed over (entregar) that “word” (palabra) to her, and consequently, lost the power (poder)
to produce a potent version of the drink herself. They further clarified that that loss of power is because
the nonhuman owner-persons, who are expected to partake in the offerings, trust only those they
recognize as skilled makers, a recognition dependent on the maker’s unique scent. However, when such
knowledge is given away, the individual loses this distinctive scent, leading the owner-persons to reject
their offerings. Meanwhile, they asserted that as a non-Indigenous woman, the aforementioned
anthropologist is unlikely to construct her own maloca, host a dance, and serve manicuera to her guests.
Knowledge is essentially practical and thus useless when solely published in books and not enacted in
specific contexts. Hence, knowledge ceded to outsiders is effectively extracted and absent from
Andoque territory.
As Fisi explained regarding the risks of sharing information with external researchers, “One is left only
with the story, while the spirit goes away.” To escape this risk, members may choose to disclose only
the superficial aspects of mythology (por encima) to researchers they work with. An informant might
also protect themselves from a loss of power, or accusations of such, by the manner in which they
characterize the knowledge-sharing process. For instance, to safeguard against potential claims from
onlookers who observed our extended discussions, Fisi once said to me after completing the narration of
a myth:
“You cannot later say, ‘Fisi handed over this word to me,’ but rather, ‘I heard Fisi [pronouncing it].’ Because this
word is not mine, neither my father’s; who knows how long it has been with us? And you cannot say, ‘Fisi told it to
me,’ because I do not tell it to you, because I don’t build a maloca and sit down to tell you, but rather, you listen while
I am narrating [usted escucha mientras yo cuento].”

464

These perspectives depict participation in research as yet another form of extraction that depletes the
Andoque territory. Since knowledge is seen as arising from the ongoing communication with specific
owner-persons, removing it threatens people’s ability to effectively engage in this communication and
achieve the practical ends depending on it. As these practical ends often involve establishing and
maintaining beneficial asymmetrical relationships with various human and nonhuman entities—and
mitigating adverse relationships—the extraction of knowledge endangers their well-being, prosperity,
and reproduction.
Another product whose export from the Andoque territory in recent years affects people’s
communication and power relations with human and nonhuman beings is coca powder, a central
substance explored in Chapter 6, and to which I will refer throughout the rest of this chapter as “mambe”
to distinguish it from the coca plant. Unlike the economic activities discussed in the previous section,
which mostly took place before my arrival in the Andoque territory and were learned about through
retrospective accounts from my interlocutors, I was able to directly observe the production of mambe for
sale during my fieldwork. The varying perspectives held by Andoque members regarding this trade, the
disparities between their discourse on it and their actual practice, and the connections they draw between
it and other economic and ritual activities, position mambe sale as an exceptional case study for delving
into their perceptions of power dynamics within the realm of market involvement.
While occasional mambe sale to fishermen and miners in the Araracuara sector was reported as early as
the 1990s (Londoño Sulkin 2012, 121), Andoque members date the beginning of mambe shipments to
Bogotá (and sometimes other cities) to 2015. During my fieldwork, many Andoque men and several
women (usually their wives) used to send mambe to their relatives and other acquaintances living in the
cities upon the latter’s demand. These brokers pay the mambe producers between COP$80,000 and
140,000 per kilo (around €18–32), selling it informally through restricted distribution chains and
charging a commission of around COP$40,000 per kilo (approximately €9). The clients include
academics and workers of governmental and non-governmental agencies working in Amazonia or with
Indigenous groups, who have developed a liking for mambe consumption during their research or
environmental and state interventions in Indigenous territories. Additionally, students, particularly those
studying at the university campus in Leticia, are among the clients. In the absence of demand from their
city brokers, Andoque producers may sell lower-quality mambe, which requires less preparation time, to
merchants and residents of Puerto Santander and Araracuara at lower prices. The preparation of mambe

465

for sale may undergo instrumentalization that would be inconceivable when preparing it for any other
end. Producers may hire younger individuals to gather coca leaves for them, divide the preparation
process into distinct stages performed on separate days to enhance efficiency for larger quantities, store
powdered coca leaves in anticipation of future demand, or use a manual meat grinder for pulverizing the
leaves instead of the traditional pestle and mortar method.
Two months into my fieldwork, during a mambeadero session at Fisi’s maloca and a week after assisting
in the preparation of mambe for sale in San José, the Sun Clan settlement, I engaged in a conversation
with Fisi and his sons regarding the Andoque’s involvement in the gold rush. When they mentioned that
some members had been involved in selling coca leaves for cocaine production in the 1980s, I inquired
if this activity posed similar risks to its participants as gold mining did. Fisi elaborated, stating that
selling coca in any form, even as mambe powder, compromises the plant’s human owner. He explained,
“The person who prepares the coca, he has a certain intention in mind, a thought on how to use it, let’s say to organize
a dance. But who knows what the person consuming it in Bogotá will do. Even if he is Indigenous; what will he think
about? The [human] owner loses control over his coca, and the plant [from which the coca powder was made] gets
angry with him, dries up and dies. But the coca that you grow for your own use will become big and pretty.”

The idea that the thoughts and actions of the mambe consumers affect the relationship between the
producer and the coca plant points to mambe’s inalienability. We have already encountered this notion
of coca’s inalienability in Chapter 6’s discussion concerning how coca constitutes its producerconsumers as true human beings, on the one hand, and the belief that the stories narrated by the
producer-consumer when consuming the powder shape their future coca produce, on the other.
In the following months, other Andoque members also reported this risk of mambe commerce. While
Fisi mentioned damage to the specific plants used in mambe production for sale, a reputed healer
asserted that such commerce could potentially lead to a complete withdrawal of support from the spirit
in the seller’s actions, which is critical in his case, as he relies on it for healing procedures. People often
explained these risks by drawing comparisons with previous economic activities, into which I do not
delve here due to their marginality or legal sensitivity. For instance, the healer claimed that mambe
commerce poses greater risks to people’s relationship with the coca spirit compared to the sale of leaves
to cocaine producers in the 1980s. This heightened risk is attributed to the more intimate nature of the
relationship required for the former activity than the latter. By contrast, Nestor, Fisi’s son, corroborated

466

his father’s assertion that the commerce involving coca in any form is problematic. He recounted that
during the 1980s, the then-elders condemned the supply of leaves for cocaine production, likening it to
the previous activity where jaguars, anacondas and caimans had been hunted for their pelts and skins,
and claiming that involvement in such hunting could not be compensated through ritual actions vis-à-vis
the nonhuman owner-persons. He explained that, similar to these animals, the coca spirit is a powerful
owner-person invoked for healing, who would refuse helping people once the plant it oversees has been
used for malevolent purposes and “making people go crazy,” as cocaine does.162 In essence, extracting
and trading such entities would render their help, as pets or companions, significantly less certain.
Interestingly, although the elaboration of tobacco paste and vegetal salt requires much stricter adherence
to dietary rules and etiquette than mambe production, my interlocutors expressed far less concern about
the occasional trade in these substances. It appears that the Andoque’s greater daily reliance on coca
than tobacco for various purposes, including less specialized healing procedures, makes mambe
commerce a more problematic activity.

Figure 27. A Miraña man drying animal pelts in 1970.
Photo: Mireille Guyot. Source: Musée du quai Branly, Administrative no. PP0079938.

Similar positions on inappropriate use of coca during the cocaine boom were recorded among Murui migrants in Leticia
(Cure 2020).
162

467

While the condemnations of mambe commerce that I heard during my first months of fieldwork in
April-June 2018 primarily targeted people from other families and clans, as time progressed, I witnessed
some of those who had expressed such condemnations, or their close relatives, engage themselves in that
commerce. My male interlocutors, particularly those involved in this trade, seemed genuinely
ambivalent about the risks of this activity. For instance, Nestor, a staunch opponent of mambe
commerce during my initial stay at his father’s maloca, turned out to be an industrious producer of this
powder for sale when I returned there in October of that year. When I reminded him of his previous
stance while we were picking coca for sale, he responded, “It’s true, selling coca endangers us, and so
we need to manage it. You need to mambeate the first spoon from the first round of filtering while
thinking about the territory, so that that coca would help you think properly. Whatever comes out
afterwards [in the next rounds of filtering] are the leftovers (sobras), the husk (bagazo), and that is what
we sell.” Later that day, during the nocturnal mambeadero session, when he talked about the spirits’
potential retaliation against the Andoque due to their excessive fishing and past involvement in gold
mining, he juxtaposed these activities with mambe trade: “The coca that we send, we send it with good
intentions (buen pensamiento), so that people will use it for their studies, so that the paisanos (fellow
Indigenous) in Bogotá will hold dances and do cures.” This perspective on mambe commerce as not
inherently negative contradicts a statement he would make two months later during discussions in the
workshop aimed at formulating a “cultural plan for territorial management,” suggesting that this activity
conflicts with fundamental Andoque principles. During these discussions, some aspects of which were
explored in Chapter 8, participants frequently referenced the “law of origin,” which refers to the codes
of proper conduct between the territory’s human and nonhuman co-dwellers laid down for the Andoque
“since the beginning” (katakádɨñḛ́ nḭe ɵ́ḛ́kńḭ́ sofa). In response to the repeated calls by both young and
old participants to adhere to their law of origin, Nestor interrupted, stating, “But we don’t obey our law
of origin if we catch tons of simi [the Callophysus macropterus fish] and send mambe to Bogotá. Then
maybe it’s not our law of origin after all…”
Like Nestor, other interlocutors mentioned measures to mitigate the risks of mambe commerce. The
ideal solution appears to involve the creation of separate gardens or plots within a garden for plants
intended for commercial ends, on the one hand, and for ceremonial ends and self-use—for thinking,
healing, and sharing in mambeadero sessions—on the other. All my interlocutors asserted that coca
harvested from gardens previously used for commerce would be entirely ineffective for ceremonial
dances. However, on several occasions, when I joined different men in the preparation of mambe for
468

personal consumption from gardens and plots where we had previously harvested mambe for sale, I
reminded them of their earlier statements advocating for such separation. One elder, who occasionally
sells coca, chuckled at my question, “Anyone telling you he’s separating gardens for [personal]
mambeating and for selling is lying; it’s simply double work!”.163
Delio, an elder uninvolved in mambe commerce, expressed a similar flexibility, linking it to coca’s
inherent flexibility. He asserted that while mambe from plants intended for sale could under no
circumstances serve as offerings to spirits in dances and other ritual settings, it could still be used for
thinking and to perform relatively simple healing procedures. “Anyway,” he said, “one transforms
(volver) the coca into what one wants it to be. When one wants to earn money, one turns the coca into a
devil (diablo);164 when one wants to bewitch, one turns it into an eagle, a jaguar, a devil. And so, one can
also turn it into something good, to think and cure with it.” The intention with which coca is planted or
prepared is thus decisive in determining its potency for meditation and healing.
For Delio’s brother, Tañe, who often sells mambe, garden separation assumes a temporal rather than a
spatial nature. According to him, the first harvest of any garden must be reserved for personal
consumption or a dance, with only subsequent harvests used for commerce. “Coca that is suitable for
mambeating is coca that, during planting, you think of the territory, you think with the territory,” he
explained, echoing Nestor’s view of mambe for sale as the leftovers of mambe intended for personal and
territory-centered consumption. This implies that coca planted with thoughts of money or things from
other lands is not suitable for meditation. According to Iai, Delio and Tañe’s brother who also frequently
sells mambe, consuming coca that was intended for sale does not directly endanger the producerconsumer. However, his explanation is crucial for understanding the broader risks associated with this
activity:
“Nothing happens if you mambeate coca that you’ve planned on selling, but it hasn’t been made for thinking. For
example, if I want to think how to cure my son, the thought [on how to perform the cure properly] will not come to me
[while consuming such coca]. It’s like a cure, for example, a cure for blindness that I openly talk about [publicar]
would no longer work for me.”

163
For a similar inconsistency among the Nɨpóde regarding garden or plot separation into those used for personal or family
consumption and those used for sale or exchange, see Griffiths 1998, 245.
164
I am not sure whether Delio was referring here to the fi’du entities referred to as diablos in Spanish or to the Christian
devil, who is sometimes mentioned as the master of money—a belief likely influenced by Colombian settlers and largely
detached from local practice or discourse (see Taussig 1980).

469

The comparison that Iai draws between coca commerce and the indiscreet publication of healing
procedures brings us back to the interrelated notions of mastery and familiarization. In our discussion of
the Andoque’s politics of knowledge and the assistance received from nonhuman entities in Chapter 10,
I mentioned the belief that indiscreetly sharing knowledge before achieving sufficient mastery over its
owner-person—often referred to as “ratting”—causes that owner-person to relinquish its “pet” position
in relation to the person who shared the information. Similarly, coca intended for sale is coca that has
already been “ratted on,” and its spiritual powers are no longer accessible to the seller. We may recall
that, while it is an inalienable item for the person producing and consuming it, coca also remains
essentially “alien.” Albeit described in M2 as a consanguine—namely, a transformed father imparting
knowledge on its children—in M1, coca also appears as an affinal figure—a transformed earthworm
suitor governed by a female hero. Much like other faunal and floral elements in the Andoque’s
environment, one must familiarize coca in order to harness its beneficial potential—to draw on the
forces of the earthworm suitor and steal the plant from its female owner to finally recognize its
connection to one’s own paternal lineage. Only thus coca will “accompany,” or assist, the producerconsumer, and not the other way around. However, as Fausto and Costa argue, familiarization is “always
an unfinished business: one hardly ever completely extinguishes the alterity of the other” (2013, 159).
Coca thus remains essentially alien to the person growing and preparing it, from whom it is, nonetheless,
inalienable.
This unfinished familiarization explains why selling mambe to others is risky. The thoughts and actions
by urban mambe consumers may represent principles that differ or go against those posited by the
producer’s traditions. This may result in the familiarization of mambe in the “wrong direction”—by its
new consumers—hindering the producer’s mastery over the coca spirit. With its agency no longer
aligned to the producer’s, the unmastered coca spirit would beget only few, feeble “children,” in the
form of the desiccated, small plants feared by Fisi and others, and may cease to heed commands from
people during its use in healing, rituals, ceremonial dances, and other spiritual interactions with
nonhuman entities. The centrality and daily use of mambe in such spiritual contexts for ensuring
people’s well-being and managing their relationships with a multitude of nonhuman entities,
underscores the critical nature of maintaining mastery over it.
This problem becomes even more pronounced if we accept two hypotheses proposed in this dissertation
(see my discussions in Chapters 6 and 12): first, concerning the Andoque’s perception of coca as an

470

important shield against affinization by human and nonhuman beings, and second, regarding the role of
elements associated with the river source—including coca—in counterbalancing the influence of things
and persons originating from the river mouth. More specifically, we may recall that in M5, Egret of the
Center gains an advantage over Egret of the River Mouth because while the latter offers the former two
substances—cigarettes and liquor—the former provides three—tobacco paste, manicuera, and coca
powder. As narrated to me by Fisi, the myth draws parallels between manicuera and Egret of the River
Mouth’s liquor, referred to as “axe-manicuera” (pɵɵkó’koa), and between cigarettes and tobacco paste,
with Egret of the Center’s words being “it is tobacco, just like yours.” Given these parallels, we are left
with the impression that the “surplus” substance giving Egret of the Center an advantage over his
opponent was mambe, for which the latter had no equivalent counterpart.
The risk of mambe commerce is, therefore, losing control in relationships with nonhuman entities which
may result in engaging in disadvantageous interactions with other human beings. But how are we to
understand the ideal solution proposed (although not necessarily adhered) by various interlocutors—
separating gardens (or periods) for coca for commercial and personal/ceremonial purposes? S. HughJones (1992, 47) described a similar Barasana practice of garden segregation during the cocaine boom as
an attempt to isolate gift from commodity. Given the gift characteristics of coca sharing discussed in
Chapter 6 and other chapters, this heuristic distinction proves useful for the Andoque case as well.
In Gregory’s (2015 [1982]) framework, commodity economy involves the exchange of alienable items
between transactors and the establishment of a relation of equality—i.e., value—between heterogenous
objects, aimed at maximizing profit. By contrast, gift economy involves the exchange of inalienable,
personified items between transactors and the establishment of a relation of rank between the transacting
subjects, in a bid to maximize debtors (ibid, 6, 46). While the price tag put on mambe in the context of
economic transactions certainly represents its “commodification,” its personified aspect and
inalienability from its producer demonstrates that it retains critical gift dimensions. The coexistence of
both gift-like and commodity-like characteristics in an item, such as mambe, does not necessarily imply
that we should abandon the gift/commodity distinction and collapse commodity and exchange, as
proposed by Arjun Appadurai, for whom exchangeability is the defining characteristic in the
“commodity situation” of an item (1986). As Laurent Fontaine (2003) argues in relation to the Yucuna,
and as we have seen throughout the dissertation, one defining characteristic of mambe is its
exchangeability, which plays out also in contexts that cannot count as “commodity situations,” such as

471

when mambe is given in exchange to myth narration or training in healing. Instead, I align with Valeri’s
(1994) approach, exemplified in his study of Huaulu marriage exchange, which employs the
gift/commodity categories in a relative and temporalized manner. This approach allows us to understand
the intricate, dialectical structure of certain economic processes, where gift-like and commodity-like
elements and phases mutually constitute each other, rather than treating these categories in an absolute
manner that reduces the entire process to one pole or the other.
In his critique of Appadurai’s approach, Michael Goddard (2000) convincingly suggests that
in/alienability serves as the distinguishing factor for differentiating gifts from commodities. It thus
appears that the widely cited strategy of segregating gardens does not only aim at isolating gift from
commodity, but at furthering the commodity status of the plants intended for commodification by
increasing their alienability from the producer. By thus achieving its idealized alienation, the
consumption of this mambe by urban consumers does not contaminate and potentially affinize the rest of
the producer’s coca, which remains inalienable. This preservation of inalienability for some of the plants
allows the producer to familiarize and master the spirit of the plant and other nonhuman entities. Hence,
it is the operation of a gift logic—which, far from equating gift exchange with benevolence, also
recognizes the dangers involved in transacting inalienable items (Parry 1989)—that dialectically
contributes to the Andoque’s conceptual enhancement of mambe commodification.
The same logic explains the two other cited strategies—thinking on the territory when consuming the
first spoon and defining the rest as “leftovers,” and using a garden’s first harvest for a ceremonial dance,
while following harvests can serve for whatever purpose. In both, mambe as a gift—consumed while
thinking or acting in line with one’s origin to ensure one’s well-being and that of one’s group—is
segregated from mambe as a commodity: an alienable substance whose uses would not further affinize
the other coca plants and frustrate the plans of its producer.
Returning from the gift/commodity distinction to Andoque concepts, we may say that, while the
producer intends to keep certain coca plants as his “pets” (ḭéna̰)—who may withhold support from their
master or retaliate if neglected—he treats others as his “orphans,” who possess less agency and can be
traded relatively safely by their captain. Given the Andoque’s association between orphans and
cultivars, I have already suggested in the previous section that the notion of orphanhood underpinned the
ontological manipulation and commodification of rubber trees in the Yiñékɒ’s period. While not

472

proposed explicitly by my interlocutors, these examples of treating different nonhuman entities as
orphans resonate with Lucas’ interpretation of the neighboring Bora’s post-genocide generalization of
the orphan position to animals, coupled with the generalization of the captaincy position for all humans
(2021, 21). However, as explained by Lucas, the Bora’s attribution of the orphan status to animals could
derive from the acceptance of Christian teachings and is rooted in the moral perception of orphans as not
“real humans.” By contrast, for the Andoque, orphanhood primarily revolves around lack of predatory
agency, and their statements reflect the more important role of economic dynamics in their active
manipulation of agency of some entities, to evade adversary consequences upon utilizing them during
specific extractive endeavors. Orphanhood may thus be viewed as the Andoque’s native conceptual
equivalent of commodification, yet the analogy has its boundaries. While a commodity is an object open
to manipulation, an orphan retains agency as a subject capable of influencing its captain. The slave trade
provides a clear example for this residual agency. In the historical accounts recounted by Andoque
members, the merchants from downriver who bought fish from the Cacambra and Spix’s Guan Clans—
transactions that proved fatal for these clans—were Andoque slaves, now serving their non-Indigenous
masters as intermediaries, who could communicate with Andoque fishermen precisely because they
shared the same language. Therefore, orphans traded by their captains can later return and contribute to
their downfall. As we will see in the following chapter as well, ontological manipulations can reduce,
but not completely obliterate, the agency of the Other.
To be sure, Andoque mambe sellers also justify this activity by referring to M5, which prophesies the
consumption of coca by non-Indigenous people. In this regard, the Andoque do not perceive mambe
commerce as a complete novelty because of its continuity with coca’s mythic potentiality to tame
Whites and replace their predatory dispositions with a trade orientation. This resonates with Marcelo
Fiorini and Christopher Ball’s (2006) argument against labeling the Xinguano Wauja’s performance of
their Atujuwá ritual in France upon request as mere commodification, because the ritual’s central theme,
predating that performance, revolves around contact with non-Indigenous agents and involves
familiarizing monstruous beings representing non-Indigenous people and the calamitous events of
contact with them. However, in the Andoque case, to achieve the taming and familiarization implied in
M5, mambe cannot be fully commodified; instead, it must be treated as a gift—an inalienable item that
requires a certain degree of personalization for exchange. Nevertheless, mambe commerce tends to be
impersonal, and it is this aspect that represents a novelty.

473

Various members proudly mention that government officials responsible for Indigenous issues and
workers from environmental organizations prefer Andoque mambe over that of other Indigenous groups.
They claim that through this preference, Andoque producers can influence the policies and initiatives
promoted by these non-Indigenous individuals. However, when directly questioned about it, my
interlocutors acknowledge that such familiarization demands a more personal exchange. Nestor, for
example, explained that to guide the thoughts and actions of an urban consumer, he needs to know who
that person is, a detail on which he does not insist when communicating with his sister, who resides in
Bogotá and acts as the broker in the transactions. Levy, who often sells the mambe prepared by his
family members from the Sun Clan in Bogotá, offered another perspective on the need for
personalization when influencing coca consumers. He explained that coca can only have an impact on
people’s minds when it is accompanied by explicit discourse and spoken words, which the powder then
helps to entrench more permanently within the listener’s body. While in a privileged position to share
both mambe and words due to his frequent participation in face-to-face meetings with non-Indigenous
people, Levy acknowledges that to influence people in this manner, he would need to personally prepare
the mambe and infuse it with his intentions, which is not something he typically does.
These considerations provide insight into the intricate nature of mambe commerce and the consequences
of coca’s dual status as both a gift and a commodity—or the vacillation between treating it as a pet and
treating it as an orphan—for the power dynamics between the Andoque and non-Indigenous and
nonhuman agents. On the one hand, by treating coca as a pet and transacting mambe as a gift, Andoque
producers can dominate urban consumers by familiarizing them, but take the risk that the thoughts and
actions of these urban consumers upon consumption would affinize the product, undermining the
producer’s ability to dominate the coca spirit and other nonhuman entities. On the other, commodifying
mambe and transacting it as an orphan shields the producer from such affinization but precludes the
domination of the consumer. However, the disconnect between people’s discourse and practice, evident
in their lack of personalization of coca commerce and failure to implement the idealized solution of
garden segregation, demonstrates that they do not to exhaust either the gift or commodity potentialities
of transactions involving a plant which is central to their identity and relations with both non-Indigenous
people and nonhumans.
In conclusion, if we consider the Andoque’s statements on mambe commerce as genuinely reflective of
their perspective, their challenges in adhering to the proposed strategies to mitigate related risks and

474

seizing opportunities to shape consumer attitudes underscore a general indecision as to how to navigate
power relations with the nonhuman and non-Indigenous entities involved. Viewed against their reported
divergence, as explored in this and the previous chapter, from rituals intended to counteract predatory
dispositions and actions by both Whites—the interactions with whom they seek turning into a reciprocal
exchange—and nonhuman owner-persons—on whose personnel they seek to prey without retaliation—
this indecision seems to extend to their capacity to optimally navigate these intricate power relations at
present. The question remains open: Are they resolute and cohesive—as individuals, distinct clans, or a
people—and prepared to enforce the measures necessary to navigate these power relations? As an
observer, it is not my place to provide an answer, but rather to express hope for their self-determined
success.
In the next chapter, we encounter a context in which Andoque attitudes and tactics point to one possible
avenue for navigating the complex power relations involving nonhuman and non-Indigenous agents—
namely, negotiations with environmental agencies. This preservationist context will also aid in our
contemplation of the extractive dynamics we have examined thus far.

475

476

Chapter 14. Environmental Action and the Encompassment of Worlds
This dissertation began with a tense meeting between the Andoque and a representative from the
Colombian National Natural Parks Agency (hereafter, Parques), setting the stage for my inquiry into the
notion of power and the power dynamics involving the human and nonhuman agents who either
participated in the meeting directly or influenced the positions undertaken by the participants indirectly.
Throughout, I have examined various aspects of this extensive topic, exploring the Andoque’s concept
of power rooted in a “center” and linked to a “river source.” I have analyzed the shifting power
dynamics among human and nonhuman centers, and delved into the Andoque’s perceptions and
strategies for influencing power relations with the non-Indigenous “river mouth.” Previous chapters
touched on environmental initiatives in relation to discussed themes. Now, I turn directly to the
Andoque’s perspectives on and expectations of environmental agencies. In this chapter, I address these
two interrelated questions: How do the Andoque perceive the impact of these agencies on their power
relations with nonhuman as well as with other non-Indigenous agents, and how do they seek to use
preservation-oriented initiatives to secure their position within these broader relations?
Akin to other Indigenous peoples in Amazonia and elsewhere, the Andoque and their neighbors in the
Middle Caquetá have been approached since the 1980s by various governmental and non-governmental
organizations aiming for environmental conservation and viewing them as potential allies because of
their long history of sustainable land and resource use. These entities, including Parques, SINCHI, Gaia
Amazonas, Tropenbos, and Amazon Conservation Team, have introduced projects that include
strengthening Indigenous territoriality and ancestral knowledge, conducting preservation-focused
research, and encouraging traditional and sometimes new ecologically sustainable economic practices.
Studies of such relationships worldwide benefitted from the political ecology framework to effectively
reveal continuities between environmental interventions and wider colonial (Eichler and Baumeister
2018; Nelson 2003) and capitalist (Brockington and Duffy 2011; Sodikoff 2012) forms of dispossession
and marginalization of Indigenous peoples and local communities. In Amazonia, these interactions were
contextualized within the advancement of perennial frontiers, each one exploiting and commodifying
different resources (Little 2001)—this resource being, in the environmental case, the very idea of nature
(Rubenstein 2004, 152–53). The interactions between Indigenous Amazonians and Western
environmentalists were described as occurring in a fragile “middle ground” of misunderstandings and

477

only partly overlapping interests, reached by two unequal parties in terms of access to economic and
symbolic power: conservation-minded Westerners, on the one hand, and Indigenous people seeking to
secure land claims and livelihoods, on the other (Conklin and Graham 1995).
The Ontological Turn brought attention to Indigenous perceptions of environmental struggles that
challenge the “naturalist” assumptions underlying research that explores power relations as occurring
solely among human beings and downplaying the nonhuman agencies central to Indigenous thinking.
Scholars associated with this approach have called to extend politics to “cosmopolitics” that
acknowledges the political agency of nonhuman entities and seeks nonrepresentational methods of
engagement with these entities to include their voices and agency in politics, drawing upon Indigenous
and other non-modern scientific understandings (de la Cadena 2010). Underscoring the fragility of the
“middle ground” between Indigenous people and environmentalists, these anthropologists tend to
describe a radical alterity between “naturalist” environmentalists and Indigenous people, reflected in the
distinct realities that each side seeks to conserve: either an objectified Nature or interpersonal
relationships with nonhuman beings (See, for Amazonia, Blaser 2009; Hirtzel 2007; and for other
regions, Bird-David and Naveh 2008; Novellino 2004). A prominent example of this perspective is
Mario Blaser (2009), who suggests that the Paraguayan Yshiro and conservation biologists aim to
preserve two disparate realities—while the former seek the preservation of the matrix of humannonhuman exchange referred to as Yrmo, the latter seek the preservation of the naturalist
“environment.” Blaser advocates for an inter-ontological dialogue between two ostensibly ahistorical
ontologies within a framework he terms “political ontology,” which, distinct from political economy and
political ecology, does not examine power and conflict as unevenly distributed within one universal
reality but across multiple realities.
Certainly, the ontological approach proves useful for understanding the Andoque’s interactions with
environmentalists. We have already observed in previous chapters the critical role that agentive
nonhuman beings, endowed with both beneficial and calamitous potentialities for humans, occupy in the
Andoque’s socio-cosmos, as well as the Andoque’s understanding of the territory as being owned by
countless powerful nonhuman entities. These perceptions form a significant backdrop to their dealings
with environmentalists and non-Indigenous agents in general. However, I strongly side with critics of
the Ontological Turn who focus on the claim to an Indigenous radical alterity in relation to nonIndigenous people. As these scholars have demonstrated, this approach tends to flatten ethnographic

478

complexities, relies on authoritative perspectives to define ontologies, and results in political
ineffectiveness due to over-emphasis of cosmopolitical futures and downplaying of present political
problems (Bessire and Bond 2014; Graeber 2015). Rather, day-to-day experience and ethnographic
evidence suggest that many entities are ontologically indeterminate for both Indigenous and nonIndigenous actors, who perceive them as subjects in some contexts and objects in others (Nadasdy
2021).
Contrary to Blaser’s assertions of incommensurability between realities, the Andoque’s version of
perspectivism and multiplicity of worlds, as explored in Chapter 8, emphasizes overlaps that signify
one’s ability to adhere to multiple connectivity logics and allow for asymmetrical encompassment
between worlds and their respective logics. In addition, as the opening anecdote illustrates, far from
reflecting radical alterity, Andoque members project it on their Apaporis neighbors, whom
environmentalists allegedly want the Andoque to emulate and who live “naked, barefoot, but happy, but
we have needs!” These needs are commensurate with those of non-Indigenous people and require
commensurate rewards to theirs (“like Parques, an Andoque only works for money”). Furthermore, the
Andoque’s strategies for manipulating and diminishing nonhuman agency, as explored in the previous
chapter, also form a crucial ontological factor that approximates—without merging with—modern
scientific and economic views of an agential gap between humans and nonhumans, with the latter
readily serving as resources for the former. This nuanced proximity is key to grasping the Andoque’s
stance towards environmentalists and their projects.
Therefore, this chapter revolves around the Andoque’s dual approach to nonhumans in the context of
environmental initiatives and public policy, treating them as both subordinate entities that can be utilized
and as largely hostile independent agents. I suggest that the Andoque’s primary goal in interactions with
environmentalists and the State is to assert their asymmetrical exchanges with nonhumans, often deemphasizing nonhuman agency, to mitigate imbalanced exchanges with non-Indigenous people. Yet,
since nonhuman agency cannot be extinguished, they remain potential adversaries, and environmental
initiatives are leveraged to repair or redefine relations with them, which economic engagement with
Whites has weakened, ensuring the preservation of the Indigenous ability to dictate asymmetrical
exchanges with nonhumans—a key condition for human well-being and reproduction.
Finally, based on the broad scope of the Andoque’s engagements with environmentalists, I consider
these interactions as a privileged arena in the unfolding of the complex relational triangle among the

479

Andoque, non-Indigenous people, and nonhuman entities. Unlike transactions with individual
merchants, miners, and settlers, dealings with environmentalists involve the entire Andoque people, span
whole reserves or ancestral lands, and affect a multitude of nonhuman entities. Additionally,
environmentalists often represent larger collectives, such as nation-states or the international bodies
funding their work. Therefore, in line with this dissertation’s definition of territory/world as connectivity
and the Andoque notion of encompassing worlds, I suggest that the Andoque’s negotiations with
environmentalists reflect a desire to reverse the encompassment of their ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí by the Whites world
under the current model of extractive economy.
Nobles and Miners
A central Andoque motivation in their interactions with environmental agencies is to safeguard
territorial rights and pursue resource sovereignty, with the latter cause often treated with suspicion by
environmentalists. As the vignette opening this dissertation demonstrated, the Andoque often contest the
environmentalists’ expectations that they adhere to the image of “the Ecologically Noble Savage”—a
“green” offshoot of the Enlightenment’s “Noble Savage” trope, who supposedly leads a harmonious
existence with nature through an unchanging economy with a minimal ecological footprint. Widely
refuted as empirical reality (Hames 2007), this image remains a powerful construct among global
audiences. Authors have shown that the portrayal of Indigenous people as achieved or failed “ecological
nobles” according to Euro-American standards of environmentalism is a powerful discursive mechanism
for governmental and non-governmental organizations to tell friend from foe, allocate resources, and
discipline communities (Harkin and Lewis 2007; Redford 1991). In response, the Andoque categorize
organizations into those attempting to preserve or restore an alleged “authentic” Indigenous lifestyle and
those acknowledging their self-determination and recognizing their current circumstances, necessities,
and desires.
Notably, the criterion of governmental affiliation or the lack thereof is less important for the Andoque.
While the NGO Gaia Amazonas epitomizes, for them, the desire of non-Indigenous people to maintain
Indigenous peoples in a state of technological dearth and inferiority, the Cahuinarí National Natural
Park’s monitoring program of arrau river turtles (Podocnemis expansa) conducted with their Miraña
neighbors serves as a critical warning of the loss of economic autonomy due to imposition of hunting
quotas by environmentalists. They view the State as primarily conservationist when it comes to

480

Indigenous people, while NGOs do not necessarily embody a defense from State abuse as they may do
in other contexts (e.g., Conklin and Graham 1995). Andoque members rightfully detect the frequent
collaboration between State organs and NGOs. They note the concessions that State entities make to
NGOs, particularly in managing projects and funds from international donors, and track the career paths
of individuals who specialize in environmental and Indigenous matters as they move between these two
types of organizations in the precarious Colombian labor market.
The Andoque’s pursuit of resource sovereignty was highlighted in their appeal to State tutelage against
the State-run REDD+ program (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, and
the Role of Conservation, Sustainable Management of Forests, and Enhancement of Forest Carbon
Stocks in Developing Countries) Visión Amazonía in 2017–19. As I discussed in collaboration with
Levy, who initiated this legal action in October 2017, and other co-authors in Andoke et al. (2023), the
Andoque protested the State’s failure to seek their Free, Prior, and Informed Consent for including their
territory and carbon stock in this emission reduction payment scheme that allocated disproportionately
low share of the benefits to Indigenous landholders. While more than a half of the program’s budget
derived from carbon stored in Indigenous reserves covering roughly 56% of the Colombian Amazonian
biomass, only 22% of the benefits were allotted to Indigenous communities, with this participation being
contingent upon adherence to pre-set, unconsented project guidelines.
The appeal was discussed in the Administrative Court of Cundinamarca (the department of Bogotá),
which rejected its demands in March 2018, and the Constitutional Court, which revisited the case in
February 2019. Although not included in the original appeal, the Andoque—and primarily Levy, the
reserve member most involved in the legal process—added claims over property rights during the
second stage, as part of their response to the Constitutional Court’s decision to revisit the case (STC063/2019, 2019). They argued that Visión Amazonía’s prohibition against double counting recorded
emission reductions, a general principle of the REDD+ framework, impacted their rights. Specifically,
by using their forest resources from 2013–17 without prior consent, the program prevented them from
independently negotiating with other parties over alternative carbon offset schemes referring to these
years. Still in February 2019, the Constitutional Court partially overturned the lower court’s ruling,
ordering the State to consult the Andoque and seek their Free, Prior, and Informed Consent on the
Indigenous component of the program, to ensure that any project they submitted would not be
constrained by a document to which they had not contributed.

481

As regards resource sovereignty, it is notable that the interrelated issues of carbon rights and unequal
benefit distribution were not addressed by either of the two courts. Throughout the proceedings, the nonIndigenous actors (the two court judges and appellees from governmental agencies) and the Indigenous
ones (besides the Andoque, these were the members of CRIMA and participants in the Indigenous pillar
workshops) employed distinct discourses. The former based its assessment of infringement on the
Andoque’s rights on changes to their current situation, while the latter asserted that their rights were
violated due to their inability to exercise self-determination and collective property rights over their
resources, including historically conserved carbon stocks. The underlying premise of the non-Indigenous
discourse and legal reasoning appeared to be the notion of the “ahistorical Indian,” whose life conditions
are presumed to remain unchanged unless affected by external influences. Conversely, the Indigenous
rightsholders articulated their legitimate economic entitlements to equitable participation in the
formulation, implementation, and benefits of a program funded by forest carbon, a significant portion of
which they own.
The consultation eventually took place in the Andoque reserve in July 2019, after my departure from
their territory. During this consultation, the Andoque did not make changes to the guidelines document.
Instead, they used the urgency of implementing the Court’s ruling to secure substantial funding for
projects that have been largely elaborated earlier and aligned with the original document. I return to the
outcome of this legal case further below.
In the Andoque’s struggle for resource sovereignty, the prevention of resource expropriation by
outsiders is complemented by efforts to obtain State recognition of their own legitimacy in managing
these entities. This is exemplified by the Andoque’s campaign to legalize gold mining, an activity that
has contributed to their negative image among environmental entities, as the opening anecdote
demonstrated. Environmentalists often overlooked labor on, or even ownership of, mining rafts by other
Indigenous peoples in the region, attributing it to coercion by dissident groups or a submission to the
temporary lure of high profits in a precarious economic periphery. However, they could not overlook the
Andoque’s 2013 request to declare their northern reserve as an Indigenous Mining Zone. This request

482

led to consequences such as the withdrawal of support from Parques for the Andoque’s efforts to expand
that same reserve.165
From the Andoque’s perspective, their legalization request was in line with the reserve’s expansion plan,
as both initiatives concerned control over space. While the expansion request was about accessing an
area stretching northward on the horizontal plane, the mining title concerned access to space lying
vertically below them, in the subsoil layer, which Colombian law defines as state property. Some
Andoque members explained that they supported the legalization request to protect their territory by
preventing actual mining projects there. This motive should be understood in light of the uncontrolled
influx of illegal foreign miners into their territory a few years earlier. It might also reflect the discourse
of state agents, particularly the National Mining Agency, which encouraged Indigenous populations to
open their reserves for mining on the grounds that state regulation would help them protect specific
“sacred sites” from extraction (Audren 2017, 53). Indeed, Audren notes that the 2001 Mining Code was
intended to allow the state to regulate informal mining in Indigenous reserves and to grant Indigenous
communities a means for economic development, thereby enabling the state to also profit from the
riches underneath hitherto unmined reserves. Hence, while the National Mining Agency courted the
Andoque to convince them to open their territory for mining, another State organ, Parques, withdrew its
support for the same reason.
In the internal debate over gold mining, with members vacillating between supporting and opposing its
legalization, resource sovereignty appears to have been a more important factor than the environmental
impacts of this activity, some of which may be coded in the broader notion of retaliation by powerful
owner-persons. This notion is captured in the title of Audren’s thesis on the legalization initiative, “The
Masters of Gold” (Les maîtres de l’or): Who are the masters of gold? The nonhuman spirits, the
Andoque people, the State seeking profits from its underground property, or the Andoque protagonists
of this initiative and the enterprises they collaborate with? We must return to the fact that negotiations
with the nonhuman owner of gold only commenced when the Andoque began pursuing the legalization
of inland excavations, rather than during earlier river extractions. One hypothesis for this is that ownerpersons are more likely to retaliate, or do so more severely, for inland rather than fluvial mining—an

Parques had previously committed to provide this support in 2012, during prior consultation assemblies held with
Indigenous reserves within the “influence zone” of the National Natural Park Serranía de Chiribiquete, as a condition for the
Andoque’s consent to the park’s expansion (PNN 2018, 16).
165

483

idea that my interlocutors have never confirmed. Another possibility is that such negotiations, while
considered essential, were not held due to a lack of interest from the miners. Rodolfo explained that he
could not engage in dialog with Dui during the period of fluvial mining to ensure the miners’ safety,
including his own sons, because they had not requested it, mentioning that the safe and effective practice
of such a risky spiritual endeavor requires the engagement of those for whom it is performed. It is
possible that the idea to conduct spiritual negotiations as part of the legalization project was a tactical
move by the project initiators, who might have wanted to demonstrate to the state their compliance with
a “traditional” protocol and to build consensus among Andoque members, thereby improving their
chances of securing the mining title. For his part, Orlando, the partner-owner of Duxon, claimed that the
elders first insisted on such dialog when the idea of legalization emerged. Regardless, the crucial point is
that negotiations with the owner-person of gold were only pursued when success in negotiations with the
State were at stake. As Audren concluded, the Andoque turned to nonhuman owner-persons as strategic
allies, and their negotiations with them were part of a broader endeavor to secure the recognition of
external agents, such as the State and non-Indigenous entrepreneurs, of their resource control (2017,
140). My data likewise emphasize the continuity, in Andoque eyes, between the legitimacy granted for
mining by nonhuman entities of the territory and the legitimacy they sought from the State. During my
excursion with Tañe in May 2019 to Axe (Pɵɵ), where stone axes had been extracted, we sat beside one
of the excavation holes. Gazing at it, he remarked, “This is a mine, isn’t it? This story [of the Piercers’
discovery of the axe repository] already indicated that the Andoque territory has everything, and that in
the future, we can extract more things to satisfy our needs. This is why I sometimes wonder, ‘Why must
we also seek approval from the Ministry of Mining?’” Andoque protagonists strove to compel the State
to acknowledge their mastery over the owner-persons of their territory and the latter’s consent for the
Andoque to safely utilize their “personnel.” In this case, the notion of resource sovereignty renders, in
legal terms, the Andoque’s aspiration that the State recognize their asymmetrical relationship with the
nonhuman entities of the territory or that it would not otherwise interfere with their relationships with
these entities.
The State’s capacity to prohibit gold mining has made it a rallying point for sovereignty among many
Andoque members, including those who originally objected to or hesitated about this activity due to
concerns over nonhuman retaliation. An example of this was evident during the workshop to formulate
the “cultural plan for territorial management” in November-December 2018, when the Andoque
participants discussed the components of their ancestral territory and eventually reached the topic of
484

“subsoil.” As they brainstormed various concepts from their language and mythology for what lies
beneath the earth’s surface, Nestor—who, on other occasions, expressed opposition to inland mining—
cautioned that they should not discuss this matter hastily, saying, “This is where they blindside us [nos
dan en la nuca].” Consequently, the final document detailed several subsoil layers, associating them with
Andoque mythology, starting from the uppermost containing the roots and tubers of garden cultivars, to
that where the dead are buried, down to petrol deposits embodying the fat of Nocturnal Curassow from
M10, and finally the tetee fire stone located at the earth’s core, which is also mentioned in that myth.
This brings us back to our discussion in Chapter 8, on how the workshop for drafting the “territorial
plan” served as an opportunity to assert human-nonhuman asymmetry. There, I examined how the
Andoque participants defined the territory to prevent interventions by non-Indigenous agents for
environmental conservation and explored the asymmetrical version of animism underlying this
definition. For the participants, protecting their territory and livelihood from such interference was on
par with protecting themselves from aggressions by nonhumans threatening their human status. During
the discussions on the categories of humanity and animality, and when reaching the topic of the
Piercers—the proto-human beings who stripped potent animals of their primordial powers to make the
territory habitable for present-day humans—a Murui woman, married to an Andoque man, suggested
that the territorial plan would serve a similar purpose, as a means for their descendants to ward off
different dangers and live peacefully. Many participants agreed with her statement. We should
remember that the Piercers embody a more aggressive and intrusive stance toward nonhuman beings, a
position we might even label as “extractive,” as illustrated in the tradition according to which they
excavated the stone axes. By contrast, for Parques, which funded the workshop, the activity’s goal was
preservationist. During our meeting in Bogotá before the workshop to hand me stationery the Andoque
needed, the senior representative of Parques in charge of communication with them intimated to me that
he hoped that the territorial plan would restore awareness among these people, whom Parques
considered to be slipping into a campesino (peasant) existence, of traditional ecological principles.
A short digression is in order to note that Andoque members are concerned about restrictions on
accessing their territory’s resources or their expropriation not only by the State in its role as a
preservationist entity but also by other non-Indigenous actors, as well as fellow members who ally with
them. This concern harks back to the period of mining legalization efforts. Several interlocutors told me
that while they were interested in pursuing illegal fluvial mining, they opposed the legalization initiative.

485

They feared that it would privilege non-Indigenous entrepreneurs because they would be the only ones
with sufficient capital to conduct costly inland excavations, suspecting that such individuals would gain
access to the reserve through Levy. Their worries centered not so much on pollution, which river
excavations also cause, but rather on dispossession of their resources by outsiders collaborating with an
Andoque member who, having graduated from a private university and residing in Bogotá, is affiliated
with politicians and businessmen and is suspected of possessing non-Indigenous thinking. Throughout
her thesis, Audren skillfully describes Levy’s dual position as both Andoque and White, mentioning
suspicions among Andoque members about his greater allegiance to his non-Indigenous allies than to his
own kin, as evidenced by a woman’s question during a community assembly, asking Levy if rumors of
him selling Andoque territory to outsiders were true (2017, 135). The Andoque continue to ponder
Levy’s loyalties. In a conversation with an Andoque elder, he recounted a dream another elder had told
him about some two years earlier (around 2017). In the dream, Levy arrived at his clan settlement of San
José in a new motorboat from Bogotá. Members of his clan joined him, but they traveled only a short
distance before drowning and losing both the boat and motor. While this dream narrative vividly echoes
T5, the two elders saw the drowning of the motorboat as the most important detail, concluding that it
symbolized Levy shedding his previous non-Indigenous mindset. My interlocutor cited Levy’s
abandonment of the mining project shortly afterwards as proof for the dream’s message. The private
market carbon offset project, which Levy campaigned for in 2019 while informing the Andoque about
the Visión Amazonía case’s outcome, elicited similar concerns among individuals from all clans. These
concerns were communicated to me during that period and again in my 2021 visit. By 2022, however,
the Andoque had ultimately given their consent to the project. Assessing the project’s impact and the
resulting cosmo-social transformations will require additional fieldwork.
My Enemy’s Friend
Although an asymmetry is sought between humans and nonhumans, the Andoque recognize that
nonhuman entities, guarded by potent owner-persons, maintain their capacity for danger and are not
reduced to mere objects. Therefore, Andoque members view environmental measures that protect these
entities as meddling with the established power dynamics within their territory. A complementary aspect
of this protection is the tendency of environmental agencies to overlook the economic hardships faced
by the people themselves—which are largely the product of the historical conquest, abuse, and
asymmetrical exchange with non-Indigenous agents. The critique of protecting flora and fauna while

486

neglecting (Indigenous) humans was echoed in the claim cited in the opening vignette: “The Whites
only give rights to trees, not to people.” This critique was also raised by Andoque members during an
assembly with a delegate of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (hereafter, the
Ministry) and a representative of Parques, which took place in the Andoque reserve in October 2018.
The objective of this encounter was to secure confirmation from the Ministry that the reserve fulfills its
ecological function, a prerequisite for the Andoque to pursue the desired expansion of the reserve’s
territory. During the assembly, the delegate and community members scrutinized the reserve’s recent
ecological history, analyzed current contamination sources, and finally brainstormed for future damage
reduction measures. Initially, active participation was impeded because the delegate employed scientific
jargon that was incomprehensible to the participants. When asked to explain the term “fauna,” he said:
“Fauna are animals; what’s an animal?”. Delio, an elder from the Sun Clan, was quick to provide a
provocative answer: “Animals are our enemies.” Baffled, the delegate ignored this definition. When he
asked: “what is Nature?” Alfonso, an elder form the Atta Ant Clan replied: “Nature is everything,
animals, trees, diablos, patasola [One Leg]…”, thereby adding nonhuman entities harmful to humans to
the list. It appears that by stating these definitions, the participants sought to make the delegate
understand that the nonhuman beings he was protecting were not innocent entities. On the other hand,
they were defensive when he suggested there could be potential environmental damage resulting from
their activities. When he mentioned the risk of species depletion due to overhunting, the participants
acknowledged that the danger existed but countered that they would not resort to hunting for
commercial purposes if they had economic alternatives. In response to his advice about controlling fires
in traditional slash-and-burn practices to prevent air pollution, the people argued that their contribution
to air pollution pales in comparison to that of cities like Bogotá. Fisi, who had traveled for conferences
globally, contributed an observation: “I’ve been to London and seen smoke from petrol refinery
chimneys rising some eighty meters into the air reaching who knows where—it might even get here, and
nobody does anything. Yet, when we burn a chagrita [diminutive for chagra, or garden], the smoke
doesn’t even rise fifty meters.” This remark, adding to the overall sentiment, underscored the Andoque’s
perception of environmental preservation efforts as an affront to their way of life. The delegate finally
returned to the thorny issue of animal depletion: “How can we regulate hunting?”. “We can’t,” one
participant said. “As long as they don’t have other income sources, people will kill the fauna.”

487

The delegate was ready to terminate the meeting, since he felt that his didactic goal of raising the
community’s ecological awareness had been accomplished, but the participants insisted on economic
solutions. In the end he referred them to other institutional bodies, saying that it was not in his power to
provide redress. His suggestion to seek out governmental sustainable development projects led some to
protest that the budgets earmarked for these projects for Indigenous people were nothing in comparison
to those allotted to settlers. “The money goes to those who fell trees, not to those who take care of the
forest,” said one participant. The Parques representative explained the logic beyond the larger
investment in projects incentivizing people to abandon non-sustainable land uses, such as agrobusiness.
“It seems wrong,” he said apologetically, “but it was devised for settlers, whose economic system
damages the environment. People believe that such investment isn’t needed for Indigenous people, since
they don’t have a deforestation problem.” “Well then,” said one participant in his forties, summarizing
the general dissatisfaction, “we will clear the forest for livestock so that the government will pay
attention to us as well!”.
In their claims, Andoque participants portrayed themselves simultaneously as forest protectors and
potential destructors. Their threats reflect a perception of policymakers as only taking seriously those
individuals and collectives who treat their environment as a resource depository for irresponsible
extraction, rather than those employing more ecologically sustainable practices.166 Therefore, State
recognition is here sought based on a similarity between the Andoque and non-Indigenous settlers, as
well as State agents, in treating nonhumans as resources with less agency than humans. However, the
Andoque and non-Indigenous perspectives of nonhuman agency do not fully merge, because, for the
Andoque, nonhumans remain inimical, potentially dangerous agents. As Delio replied to the Ministry’s
delegate, animals are their enemies—entities whom human ancestors overcame in the transition from
mythical times to present ones in order to become fully human, and whom actual humans have to
overcome to maintain their full human status, stay healthy and alive, and bequeath this status to their
children. As Alfonso pointed out in his short list of the components of nature, this concept contains
beings such as the fi’du entities and One Leg, who are particularly dangerous in their capacity to

The grievance over prioritizing deforestation over forest conservation was intended to be addressed by the REDD+
framework, which devised economic transfers to landowners in developing countries possessing large carbon stocks,
incentivizing them to enhance or refrain from harming these stocks. However, the benefit-sharing mechanism of the REDD+
program Visión Amazonía mirrored similar budgetary priorities. This mechanism, as discussed by Andoke et al. (2023),
allocated larger budgetary shares to actors responsible for deforestation to create for them alternative economic activities,
whilst Indigenous forest guardians received a smaller share of overall budgets.

166

488

transform humans into nonhumans precisely because of their defiance of clear definitions, epitomized by
their capacity to transform themselves.
During a mambeadero session at Fisi’s maloca in one of the nights of the “territorial plan” workshop
week, I discussed my research and aspiration to advocate for Indigenous people through its publication
with the maloca residents, Elias, and Nelson—two ex-maloqueros staying there that week. Elias
highlighted the hardships for Indigenous peoples created by the State, complaining that it simply prefers
them to stay as they are—this is why it gives monetary incentives to conserve the forest to the settlers
and not to them. I resorted to the explanation provided by Parques’ representative, to which Elias
reiterated the idea to deforest until the State pays attention to them. When the topic switched to cultural
preservation, he said: “We need to teach the children our language, but how can I do that when I need to
buy food, clothes, all those necessities?” Nelson intervened, saying: “So we will use our territory if they
don’t help us. We will damage the forest so that they pay us to stop.” Nestor agreed, but his father Fisi
calmed them down, saying: “But we don’t want to finish like the Cacambra, there’s always danger from
that side too.” Therefore, while the Andoque can mobilize asymmetries between humans and
nonhumans to enhance their status within national society, these asymmetries are not fixed; the threat of
retribution from owner-persons looms, as evidenced by the aftermath of the Cacambra Clan’s fishing
activity.
While my interlocutors have never said it explicitly, I suggest that the Andoque’s perception of
nonhuman enmity and hostility underlies not only their relations with nonhumans, but also with
environmentalists. According to Karadimas, the Miraña express suspicion over the assumption of
responsibility for the life and reproduction of the animals within the Cahuinarí National Natural Park,
which partly overlaps with their reserve, because such responsibility is normally assumed by the
guardian spirits of animals (2013, 195). Similarly, from the Andoque’s point of view, the protection of
flora and fauna by environmental organizations as guarantors of their “rights”—i.e., their capacity to
exist and reproduce—is analogous to these masters’ actions, with whom, we should remember, Andoque
members maintain a complex relationship of hostility, seduction, and familiarization. We can even
daringly apply the non-Indigenous concept of “agency” to reflect how, much like owner-persons (ño̰e)
representing the personhood and agency (ño̰) of the nonhuman entities they safeguard, these
organizations are “environmental agencies” also in the sense of embodying the capacity of flora and
fauna to act. However, I would not go as far as arguing, as Vincent Hirtzel (2007, 76–77) did for the

489

Bolivian Yuracaré, that the Andoque perceive environmental entities as a reconfiguration of these
owner-persons. According to Hirtzel, while these guardian spirits would release game animals to the
Yuracaré upon a shaman’s request, the park manager, either unable or unwilling to give them game, can
instead offer work tools and other objects when appealed to for his generosity. These items, in relation
to the park manager, occupy a position analogous to that which game animals hold in relation to their
guardian spirits. The Andoque, on the other hand, are well aware that environmentalists are distinct from
owner-persons, and, as shown above, they base their interactions with the former on their asymmetrical
relations with the latter. Thus, the sense of resource sovereignty precludes such appeals to generosity,
thereby making interactions with environmentalists more transactional. Environmental entities assuming
the role of safeguarding nonhumans are expected to compensate the Andoque for restricting access to
these resources, which they illegitimately usurped. Furthermore, the notion of the Animal World being
encompassed by the Andoque’s ño̰ ́ ḭ́ fɵsí (Chapter 8) views outside attempts at stewardship over
nonhumans as an infringement on the principles of their world and origins, making interactions with
environmentalists more confrontational. As the saying goes, my enemy’s friend—or protector—is also
my enemy.
Respecting Knowledge, Respecting Boundaries
Given the central role of knowledge in power relations with human and nonhuman centers, as explored
in Chapters 9 and 10, the attitude of environmental agencies towards Indigenous knowledge is also a
crucial aspect of the Andoque’s stance towards these entities. The concerns related to Indigenous
knowledge were a central issue of another meeting between the Andoque and Parques in March 2019.
This meeting also included their Murui-Muina and Féénemɨna neighbors from the upriver Monochoa
Reserve, as well as a representative from the NGO Fundación Puerto Rastrojo. This organization had
been contracted by Parques to inventory the flora and fauna within the expanded area of Chiribiquete
National Natural Park, aiming to establish the conservation principles for this area. The World Bank, as
the funding entity, required the sharing of this information with the Park’s Indigenous neighbors and
consultation with them on the matter. Consequently, Parques organized a meeting at Fisi’s maloca with
the Andoque and representatives from Monochoa, who had stayed at the maloca the previous night
following a different meeting.

490

During the mambeadero session on the evening before the meeting with Parques, members from both
reserves expressed their concerns about the expanded Park’s increased influence, which might
eventually result in restrictions on hunting and other land use practices. The governor of Monochoa
warned that if Parques identified species of special global interest for preservation, Indigenous access to
the expanded area could be restricted, violating previous consultation accords; others even expressed
fears over potential hunting restrictions within the reserves. Many participants voiced demands for
reconocimiento (recognition) of Indigenous knowledge in a double sense—both acknowledging its
scientific value and providing remuneration for it. They criticized environmental organizations for hiring
outsiders to conduct research in their forest, relegating local elders with vast knowledge to merely
adorning their reports with Indigenous folklore. This practice, they argued, diminished the value of their
knowledge and ignored the wisdom encapsulated in myths or even in the names of plants and animals. A
point raised by a Nɨpóde member of the Andoque reserve garnered broad agreement: it was Indigenous
knowledge that had preserved the forest thus far; if the Whites seek preservation, they should pay for
that knowledge.
The meeting the following morning began with an explanation from Parques’ representative about the
rationale for the expedition, mentioning also the meeting’s secondary objective: hiring locals to assist
researchers as trailblazers, hunters and fishermen, and general manual laborers for the month-long
activity. The representative drew parallels between the conservation principles that the expedition aimed
to elaborate and the territorial plans formulated by the Indigenous reserves. He stated that the scientific
findings from the expedition would eventually be shared with the park’s Indigenous neighbors, enabling
them to use the relevant results for their own territorial plans. Additionally, he mentioned a future phase,
termed “management of knowledges” (gestión de conocimientos), involving dialogue between Western
and traditional knowledge. The Indigenous participants sought clarification on the date and agenda of
this future phase, but the representative evaded a direct response, admitting that it had not been planned
yet. Elias and other Indigenous participants, suspecting that a collaborative moment might never occur
or lack reciprocity, insisted on the immediate inclusion of Indigenous experts (conocedores) and
scientists (científicos)— terms referring to elders knowledgeable in their traditions—in the expedition,
alongside Western scientists. Contrary to the prior consultation accords between the two reserves and
Parques regarding the park’s expansion, which stated that research in the expanded area must recognize,
respect, and protect the traditional and ancestral knowledge of the Indigenous peoples, Parques’

491

representative maintained that the study could proceed as planned, as it was confined to the Park’s
boundaries.
The representative from Puerto Rastrojo then took the floor and outlined the tasks for the laborers, as
well as the composition of the scientific group. He noted that the group would include specialists for
every class of flora and fauna, such as ornithologists, entomologists, etc., to study species within their
expertise. In response, the governor of Monochoa argued that, for this very reason, an Indigenous expert
should be included to provide the Indigenous perspective on species found in both the park’s expanded
area and the Indigenous territories —specifically, “the notion of this species as it is held by the
Indigenous (el concepto propio de este especie como lo está pensando el indígena).” The representatives
from both organizations acknowledged the importance of this recommendation but stated that its
implementation would have to wait for future projects.
Puerto Rastrojo’s representative then read aloud the environmental safeguards for the project, which
included a comprehensive list of routine environmental protection measures that the laborers were
expected to follow. Discussing these regulations at length in front of a large group, most of whom would
not be directly involved in the work, seemed to serve only as a means of indoctrinating the audience in
“correct” environmental practices. Subsequently, Parques’ representative read aloud the social
safeguards required by the World Bank. One primary measure was the consultation of Indigenous
communities bordering the park and the incorporation of their knowledge throughout the project’s
phases (cf. World Bank 2016). When local participants tentatively pointed out that they had been
excluded from the project’s planning, hence the measure had not been honored, Puerto Rastrojo’s
representative claimed that these were general safeguards that applied differently in each project. He
argued that since the expedition was a scientific endeavor, it did not necessitate the inclusion of
traditional knowledge. Parques’ representative even suggested that safeguards should not be interpreted
too rigidly (“al pie de la letra”). Interestingly, while, to my knowledge, no Indigenous experts were
ultimately employed in the expedition, the publication on Parques’ website suggests otherwise (See
PNN 2019).
Beyond merely expecting economic benefits for local experts, the Indigenous pursuit for the inclusion of
their knowledge should be understood within the context of concerns about possible restrictive actions
by Parques, a perceived alliance between environmentalists and nonhuman entities, and the strategic role

492

of knowledge within the Indigenous cosmos. As we have seen in previous chapters, knowing the names
and origin stories of beings in one’s environment enables communication with these beings, the
countering of their predatory attempts and other harmful effects, and the enlistment of these beings for
one’s benefit. Thus, Indigenous knowledge of nonhumans enables the knower to safeguard themselves
and their kin from nonhuman aggressions and guarantee their own reproduction. Conversely, studying
nonhuman beings primarily for their own protection and reproduction, without the involvement of
Indigenous experts, can lead to the development of a knowledge base that endangers and restricts the
Indigenous people who coexist with these nonhumans.
In addition to lack of respect for their knowledge, Andoque members (and their neighbors) are also
concerned about the imposition of foreign categories of knowledge on their territories. At a CRIMA
conference in Araracuara in May 2019, the organization’s vice president shared information on the
Ministry’s new Indigenous Environmental Management System (SIMA) that would subsume the PredioPutumayo reserve within a larger management zone called the Caquetá Axis. Levy, who was also
present at the conference, contextualized this initiative as part of the emerging trend of macro-territorial
management among environmental agencies, of which Gaia Amazonas’s Triple A project (AndesAmazon-Atlantic) was an alarming forerunner:
Some anthropologists now claim there’s one Indigenous way of thinking from the Andes to the Amazon delta.167
They say that the Yuruparí gods [of Indigenous peoples of the Vaupes-Apaporis Rivers] go as far as Araracuara. The
struggle over the subsoil is already lost, so we must be wary of another defeat. There are Indigenous peoples that
encourage anthropologists to grant trees, the forest, and the land the same rights that humans have—peoples who
talk about the Pachamama, about Mother Earth… We must be wary of that, it’s dangerous for us. Tree felling is
already criminalized, we don’t want to lose this battle too.

The participants of all ethnicities agreed. A Féénemɨna elder noted that Indigenous perspectives on
territorial management are completely opposed to the Ministry’s top-down vision:
We already have our own SIMA, but ours is not based on imaginary lines like the Whites’ SIMA: here it is the
Caquetá Department, and there it’s the Amazonas [Department], and they only destroy everything. For us, each
territory has its own laws, its own thinking, and when a maloquero from here joins his thinking to a maloquero from

In local discourse, antropólogos means both anthropologists and other specialists advocating for Indigenous peoples
and/or counseling governmental and non-governmental agencies on them.
167

493

downriver, and that one joins his to that of a maloquero from Brazil [farther downriver], they create the ‘famous’
‘Caquetá Axis’ that the Whites talk about.

Based on the same principle that enables a sorcerer to harm another person by thinking and manipulating
the latter’s origin story and the stories of different elements in their surroundings, a powerful shaman
can also turn the owner-persons of a given territory against its inhabitants by focusing on that territory
and its origin myths. Additionally, as Rodolfo’s claim to exclusivity of his relationship with the ownerperson of gold, knowledge can grant a monopoly over safe land and resource use.168 These conceptions
highlight why the Andoque (and their neighbors) are apprehensive that imposing foreign categories of
knowledge on their territory could threaten their livelihoods and well-being, and may even be viewed as
a violation of their territorial integrity.
In his study of the efforts to integrate Indigenous knowledge and Western science in processes of
resource management and environmental impact assessment in the North American Arctic and
Subarctic, Nadasdy (1999) emphasized the one-sided nature of this integration. This unidirectionality is
evident in how Indigenous knowledge is compartmentalized and distilled to fit into Western science,
without challenging the latter’s methodology and underlying epistemology. According to Nadasdy, this
approach perpetuates the power imbalance between the two parties and marginalizes Indigenous
knowledge, subordinating it to the non-Indigenous center of calculation and conceptual production.
Blaser sees such dynamics as indicative of “ontological conflicts,” where Western scientists tend to
diminish Indigenous knowledge, considering their ontologies as mere cultural interpretations of a
universal Nature, the ultimate understanding of which is reserved for the Western scientists disposed to
the naturalist ontology (Blaser 2013). Interestingly, the conflict in the Middle Caquetá goes beyond a
simple clash between Indigenous and non-Indigenous ontologies, as the centers of conceptual
production, as cited by Levy, extend beyond Europe, North America, or the Global North; they also
exist in the Vaupés and the Andes. The foreign categories that Levy warned the conference attendees
about include concepts from other Indigenous peoples that align more easily with non-Indigenous
preservation objectives and are thus adopted by environmental organizations. Levy’s reference to the
Vaupés in particular is significant. The fear of conceptual projection from there echoes the Andoque’s
ascription of “ecological nobility” to the Tukanoan-Arawakan Indigenous population of that region,

For a similar notion of control over resources through relations with nonhuman beings outside Amazonia, among the
Siberian Evenki, see Anderson 1998, 75.

168

494

which makes them favorite partners for several environmental agencies, as well as the Andoque’s more
general disdain for these groups for their ideal of reciprocal exchange with nonhumans. In essence, from
the Andoque’s perspective, the imposition of both Indigenous and non-Indigenous categories on their
territory is intrusive and poses threats to territorial integrity and safe interactions with nonhuman
entities.
Therefore, Andoque members emphasize the need to structure environmental projects around local
“thinking” (pensamiento) rather than a foreign one. At an internal assembly in May 2019, Nestor briefed
the participants on a regional meeting with Parques he had attended the previous week. During this
meeting, Parques proposed including the Andoque reserve in their project for the monitoring and
preservation of the arrau river turtle (charapa), which they conduct within the neighboring Miraña
reserve. Nestor relayed that the organization had provided a grim report on the conditions in the remote
parts of their reserve downstream, along the border with the Miraña—an area seldom visited by the
Andoque—describing how charapa hunters from downriver were exploiting the absence of monitoring
on the Andoque stretch of the river. The participants at the internal assembly were both surprised by the
news and angered by these invasions into their territory and the consequent depletion of the river turtle
population. Despite their general indignation towards Parques, they expressed a desire to participate in
the program. However, Adán from the Atta Ant Clan tempered this enthusiasm by saying:
“When an organization begins by looking after the charapas, before you know it, they’re claiming the whole territory
for themselves (se adueñan de todo el territorio). So, we’ve got to think about the risks that come with this program.
Bit by bit, we could end up losing grip on our land. First, they’re on the riverbanks with the charapas, and next thing
you know, Parques will say they’re breeding in the lakes too and start poking around there as well.”

Other participants mentioned that they already have all the knowledge about charapas that they need
from their own traditions, and do not see the point in studying their life cycle or breeding grounds the
way Parques does. Orlando said they should make it clear to Parques that they will handle the charapa
protection with their own thinking, and from their own mambeaderos and malocas; all they would need
from Parques is the resources to do so, like boats, gas, and money. Anchoring a project in local
knowledge is crucial to prevent externally funded projects from undermining territorial integrity and
Indigenous ways of life, ensuring that territorial coexistence with nonhumans is conducted on terms that
are appropriate for humans. In the following section, I will explore additional goals the Andoque have
for collaborating with environmentalists.

495

Converting Money into Salt
What do the Andoque attempt to achieve by their eventual participation in most of the environmental
initiatives proposed to them? In Echeverri’s discussion of the negotiations between their Miraña
neighbors and Parques, with whose Cahuinarí Park their reserve overlaps, he observed the different
goals that the Indigenous and institutional parties attach to the concept of “territorial management.”
While Indigenous management strives to reproduce human life by forming relations with nonhumans
within their territory, preservation policies demarcate human-exclusive areas for wildlife reproduction
(Echeverri 2005, 241). Based on the Miraña’s understanding of “territory” as body, appetite, or desire,
the difference in objectives between the two parties can also be examined through the lens of specific
exchanges between them. According to Echeverri, while Parques emphasized the importance of
intercultural dialogue for exchanging concepts and principles for proper management, the Indigenous
party primarily sought the exchange of food and other objects, as well as access to job vacancies in the
park. Echeverri draws a perspectivist conclusion from this disjunction: for the Miraña, the issue was
“not a question of constructing ‘souls’ (as the conceptual principles of a management programme would
have) but the construction of bodies” (2005, 244), for which relationships with others are essential. This
insight also illuminates the Andoque’s tendency to inflate project budgets for logistics, as described in
the opening anecdote and observed in most other interactions with environmentalists during my
fieldwork. In this final section, I will make a similar claim, but on a broader scope, by shifting the focus
from bodies to territories/worlds as potentially encompassing/encompassed logics of connectivity.
Additionally, in line with this dissertation’s focus, I will stress a/symmetries in exchange—in this case,
with non-Indigenous and nonhuman agents.
When proposing projects to environmental organizations, most Andoque members manifest a
“traditionalist bias” toward projects strengthening la cultura: native language, gardening, maloca
construction, ceremonial life, and traditional craftwork. Although they often complain of economic
distress, most men and women, young and old—except for Levy—show little interest in development
projects that can benefit from external funding to create sustainable income sources, like cacao or
cashew cultivation.
At first glance, the traditionalist bias can be seen as an instrument for obtaining resources for community
members, given that environmental organizations typically prefer funding Indigenous practices and
institutions that are perceived as traditional and, as such, translate to a minimal ecological footprint.
496

While this remains a possibility, Andoque members also show this bias when they have a freer hand in
project elaboration. This was evident in the outcome of the prior consultation process concerning the
REDD+ program Visión Amazonía in July 2019. Despite being practically given free rein by court
ruling to create and implement any ecologically sustainable project with substantial funding, the
Andoque’s proposed projects reflected their traditionalist bias. These included a language revitalization
project, one to strengthen women’s horticultural practices, and another for maloca construction across
all ethnic communities under CRIMA’s jurisdiction.
The traditionalist bias is closely linked with the expectation of monetizing certain activities. This is
evident in the case of the language project. It was first discussed at an internal assembly a month before
the Court ruling. On more than one occasion, and particularly at that assembly, community members
voiced their fear of language loss. As among the Florida Seminole (Cattelino 2008, 71–72), the Andoque
perceive their native language as essential both for ethnic distinctiveness, which is important to benefit
from affirmative action policies, and for exchanges with the land’s nonhuman co-dwellers. As
mentioned in previous chapters, people are largely undecided whether individual dialogue with the
spirits for safety during hunting and fishing is as effective in Spanish as it is in Andoque, but all agree
that ceremonial dances can only be performed in the latter. At the assembly, people agreed that the
elders should urgently teach the language to the younger generation, and that they should immediately
start speaking it more with them. However, this did not translate into any observable increase in intergenerational native language use because community members were waiting for the project to
materialize. However, apart from bringing in a linguist to help them devise a study program, the
project’s core budgetary components were coca purchase for mambeaderos in which the language would
be taught, travel expenses to attend them, and remuneration for elders teaching their relatives. Although
a well-structured study program could facilitate this process, it seemed that the bottleneck that made the
Andoque await a project addressing a pressing problem was the remuneration for elders and logistical
issues that they could have resolved another way. I will revisit this project further ahead.
As seen in Elias’s speech in Fisi’s mambeadero, “necessities” were sometimes cited as an obstacle to
speaking and teaching the language within the nuclear family. During a discussion at an assembly with
SINCHI in April 2019 on promoting native language skills within the family, an Andoque schoolteacher
questioned who would compensate the parents for this task. To be sure, while the Andoque’s views on
the legitimate boundaries of monetizing social transactions may differ in some respects from those in

497

non-Indigenous societies with more disembedded economies, they certainly do not seek payment from
their children for the items or services they provide them. What is interesting in these statements is that
the money that is presumably needed for these intra-family transactions is expected to come from
outside, non-Indigenous sources.
To explain the Andoque’s traditionalist bias and the associated expectation for external funding of
certain local transactions, we need to zoom out to the Andoque’s overall involvement in the market
economy. The previous chapter discussed the dangers faced by the Andoque from nonhuman entities
due to increased pressure on territorial resources. This pressure arises from their participation in
extractive economic activities, which is driven by a need to satisfy their necesidades—that is, to acquire
externally manufactured goods. In the dynamics I described, the more imbalanced the Andoque’s
exchanges with Whites are, the more intense the natural exploitation becomes, leading to an escalation
in retaliatory actions by nonhumans.
In this context, it is important to note that externally manufactured goods have become “necessities” also
because they offer protection against faunal harm. Western medicine is valued for its ability to treat
certain local diseases thought to stem from animals; boots shield people from diseases and pains that are
believed to be contracted through animal footprints, and flashlights and shotguns serve as potent
defenses against animals and indispensable utilities for hunting, taking the place of Indigenous tools that
many no longer know how to make or use. Although technological solutions may partly obviate
cosmological ones (Ingold 2000, 216), Andoque members say that they engage in fewer humannonhuman ceremonial negotiations because they are absorbed by “necessities.” Aside from the time and
energy spent to sustain themselves in unfavorable economic conditions, they say that under the current
conditions, “the people’s mind is elsewhere” (la gente está pensando otra cosa) and specifically
concerned with earning money. As Griffiths (1998, 246) noted for the Nipóde, the Andoque conceive of
the dual economy—in which economic activities directly linking production with consumption coexist
with market-mediated activities—not so much in terms of different activities (e.g., hunting or coca
cultivation can be deployed for both), but in terms of the specific thinking (pensamiento) they apply to
each activity. This means invoking the origin myths that apply to the materials, procedures, and
objectives of each activity and the owner-persons ensuring success and safety in them, including those
concerning trade with Whites. Accordingly, rather than merely diverting attention from subsistence and
ritual life, economic and monetary needs orient people’s thoughts around another cosmological axis,

498

creating different dispositions. Consequently, my interlocutors described a dynamic where the more they
are oppressed economically, the less they engage in and prepare their youth for the ritual activity that
has traditionally protected them from nonhumans. On several occasions, while discussing his different
initiatives, Levy told me that “I will see people dancing” once their income is assured, reflecting a
prioritization pattern found among other Amerindians (e.g., Cattelino 2008, 63). However, we should
critically examine such a needs-based perspective of the economy. The term necesidades refers not only
to the mythic expropriation of specific items, which, along with their derivatives, are now sought
(kahɵ́ɵi, “our missing things”), but also to “that which we find pretty” (kama hɵ́ñői)—a concept that
recognizes the dynamism of desire and the potential for the creation of new needs. As Gordon observed
among the Xikrin, the range of necessities tends to expand in direct relation to the influx of external
resources (Gordon 2006).
The critical role of thinking in distinguishing the two economic models points to an ontology of the dual
economy in which world/territory, or ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí—as defined through the concepts of “connectivity” and
“encompassment” in Chapter 8—is the main category. Similar to how notions such as “The Creator”
indicate (or create) the encompassment of the Animals World by the Andoque World, the dual economy
in the Middle Caquetá represents the encompassment of the connectivity of the Andoque World by the
connectivity of the Whites World. This is evidenced in the fact that many Andoque members frequently
engage in various paid economic activities to acquire access to externally manufactured goods, in a
chain of extraction or production, exchange and consumption activities that link them to non-Indigenous
merchants, consumers, and producers, at the cost of their jeopardized relationships with countless
nonhuman entities in their territory. Within this logic, the use of the term “necessities” also points to the
inconvenient and vulnerable position of the individual caught between two worlds, or two kinds of
connectivity, with the Andoque’s critiques of environmental interventions expressing concerns over the
precariousness of their position in these two worlds.
In the relational framework developed here, I propose that Andoque members strive to preserve and
promote certain Indigenous cultural practices through externally financed projects so that their
engagement in these practices will not result in an even greater economic marginalization. In doing so,
they can nourish their relationships with the human and nonhuman beings of their ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí without
worsening their position in relationships governed by the logic of the Whites World, and which heavily
rely on monetary access, and perhaps even improve their chances to navigate them. This explains, for

499

example, the enthusiasm of the participants at the territorial management workshop in December 2018,
which surprised me given the many objections these same people had previously expressed at meetings
with Parques—such as the one in the opening vignette—and which could communicate disinterest. They
were interested in it but getting paid for discussing their territorial management allowed them to manage
their position in the Whites World as well, if only to a limited extent.
Furthermore, similar to other Indigenous groups (Nahum-Claudel 2018; Whyte 2017, 157), common
affirmations at Andoque internal assemblies suggest that environmental initiatives are viewed as
opportunities to use funding from non-Indigenous agents to reestablish dialogs with nonhuman entities
and redefine the relationships with them that have been disrupted by unbalanced exchanges with nonIndigenous agents. During the internal assembly in May 2019 where the arrau turtle preservation project
was discussed, participants also considered potential projects to propose to Visión Amazonía following
the prior consultation. Orlando suggested a comprehensive project for territorial management in the
same remote downstream frontier affected by arrau poachers and loggers, focusing on the broader floral
and faunal populations. In this project, he said, community members could inventory the names of the
trees and animals, and the elders would recount the origin myths that prompt their reproduction. Hence,
external funding was deemed necessary for tasks that concern dialogs with nonhuman owner-persons,
which we might categorize as spiritual or ritual.
We can now return to the language project. During my visit in July-August 2021 I followed up on the
progress of this project, which had started a year earlier. Most of the almost COP$600,000,000
(approximately €136,000) that it had received from the government was dedicated to “carnivals”
(carnavales), where members of all age groups and clans participated, and children, younger generations
and in-marrying women of other ethnicities demonstrated the language skills taught to them by elders.
The carnivals included communal meals with local foodstuffs bought from the participants themselves,
and most ended with a non-ritualized version of the Opossum Dance to teach the children traditional
songs. This did not seem to me to be particularly effective in improving spoken language skills, and the
students did not seem to have made significant progress as compared to the general level I had observed
two years earlier. But the project’s importance for its participants seemed to lie elsewhere. My
impression was that it was used for the dual aim of distributing benefits among as many families as

500

possible and enhancing the specific language skills required for negotiations with nonhuman entities in
the ceremonial songs, which is crucial, in turn, for social reproduction.169
Thus, Andoque preferences suggest that environmental initiatives might counterbalance the unequal
exchanges with Whites, at least partially. These initiatives represent a limited reversal of the extractive
logic, which appropriates resources from the Andoque World, undermining its relational network and
the Andoque’s position in it. By contrast, under the preferred model, resources extracted from the
Whites World are fed into the web of relationships constituting the Andoque territory, potentially
enhancing Andoque lives and enabling them to set the tone in interactions with nonhumans. Drawing on
the frequent Andoque comparison of money to vegetal salt, we can interpret this approach as converting
money into salt: transforming the means of communication, exchange, and power and domination in the
Whites World, into a means of communication, exchange, familiarization, and counter-predation in the
Andoque’s ancestral territory. This hypothesis thus illustrates the relatively new form that the
competition over asymmetrical exchanges involving humans and nonhumans, as explored in this
dissertation, takes within the context of the contradicting non-Indigenous dispositions for large-scale
extraction and preservation.
In some respects, this reflects a “conversion between transactional orders,” as defined by Bloch and
Parry (1989), where gains from short-term transactions involving competing individuals are used to
reproduce the long-term social or cosmic order. However, unlike the individual-focused short-term
transactions described by Bloch and Parry, these environmental projects are collective, impacting the
entire reserve rather than just individual members. More generally, this conversion echoes other
Indigenous Amazonian strategies to counterbalance disadvantageous asymmetrical exchanges with
Whites by harnessing their resources for Indigenous advantage (Buitron and Deshoullière 2023; Kelly
2011), an approach that can be termed, in this context, “Indigenizing environmentalism.”
However, I would like to stress here the ontological dimension of this conversion. The metaphoric
conversion of money into salt serves as an example for how, akin to the principle of capital conversion
(Bourdieu 1986), power can be translated from one ontology—or the world where it is stabilized,
understood as connectivity—into another. This concept lays the groundwork for a political ontological
The Andoque are not the only Amazonian society where intra-community reciprocity and sharing is associated with
peaceful coexistence with nonhumans (Blaser 2009; Nahum-Claudel 2018), an association whose ontological meaning has
yet to be explored and theorized.

169

501

approach that, unlike Blaser’s (2009; 2013) focus on the competition among radically incommensurate
ontologies vying for marginalization, replacement, or annihilation of each other, delves into more subtle
processes of continuity between political actions and power dynamics occurring in different, yet
partially overlapping, regimes of connectivity. In the present case, the overlap concerns the Andoque’s
perception of human-nonhuman asymmetry and the strategies they employ to minimize nonhuman
agencies.
The Andoque’s “hierarchical animism” and ontological manipulations underpin their claim to resource
sovereignty. While not reducing their territory’s nonhuman components to mere objects, they indicate in
interactions with environmentalists their recognition of possessing valuable assets in the Whites World,
and insist that the latter acknowledge this value similarly. Based on this recognition, the Andoque wish
to receive funds for projects, which they would then employ to improve connectivity with and exert
greater control over these nonhuman entities, to avert the dangerous potential of their agencies, and this
way participate more safely also in economic exchanges with Whites. The conversion of money to salt,
or the movement across worlds of connectivity, becomes feasible through these strategic shifts in
agency, which has served Andoque captains and ordinary members, as well as clans, in navigating both
predatory and trade exchanges with nonhuman and non-Indigenous actors in the diverse past and present
contexts explored throughout this dissertation.

502

Conclusion: Agnatic Identity and Hierarchical Animism in Amazonia
Throughout this dissertation, I have explored the Andoque’s notions of power and the dynamics of
power within various relational contexts: among group members, between them and nonhuman entities,
and between them and non-Indigenous agents. My discussion addressed three blind spots and underexamined areas in research: first, the anthropocentric bias in the general debate on power within social
sciences and political thinking, which, based on naturalist assumptions, excludes nonhuman entities
from the range of agentive players in power dynamics; second, the tendency in the ethnography of
animist societies, especially Amazonian ones, that acknowledges Indigenous conceptions of nonhuman
agency, to overlook power dynamics, especially ontological asymmetries and socio-political forms of
domination; and lastly, the gap between ontological and political-economic approaches that obstructs
symmetrical analyses of Indigenous peoples’ simultaneous embeddedness in interactions with
nonhuman entities and with non-Indigenous agents, including macro-institutions such as the State and
the Market. In confronting these identified shortcomings in the research, I defined power as the ability to
transition from symmetrical exchanges—of bodies, vital principles, actions, agency, and goods—to
asymmetrical ones that increase one’s capacity to produce persons and counteract harmful asymmetries
or those that do not serve one’s goal of person production. This definition enabled me to trace the
continuities between inter-human power relations and those involving humans and nonhumans. It also
allowed me to simultaneously encompass the Andoque’s strong ethos of trade, the gift dimensions of the
circulating items, and the predatory logic that pervades their cosmology and everyday understandings.
The concept of exchange, which assumes a minimum of three participants—two transacting and one
transacted—paved the way for considering persons not only as subjects of exchange but also as the
transactees, as seen with human orphans traded for axes and nonhuman orphans for vegetal offerings. In
such varied contexts, using the distinction between homosubstitution and heterosubstitution, I illustrated
how power is both founded on and facilitates ontological manipulations and the degradation of agency
among human and nonhuman beings to engage in heterosubstitutive trade with Whites and avoid the
damages of homosubstitutive retaliations by nonhumans.
Drawing on the Andoque’s cosmo-spatial conceptions, I demonstrated how the power of a given river
center relies on the alterity and forces associated with the river source to establish itself, navigate
relationships with other centers, both human and nonhuman, and with the river mouth, which is
associated with Whites. Power in its social form is embodied in the tne’túi force of predation, associated

503

with the river source but pervading all cosmic relations—akin to the pervasive nature of power in
Foucault’s theory. However, mastery and familiarization, two processes anchored in the Andoque’s
strong agnatic ideology and the identity of patriclan centers, are essential for channeling this force and
recasting symmetrical relations of predation and other exchanges with Others into asymmetrical terms.
Yet, the power equilibrium that ensues cannot be captured by such substantive notions as “property,”
which imply possession by an individual or a group (and that, under specific conditions, could become a
“capital”), as it is contingent upon the ongoing success in harnessing the agencies of others in the myriad
relationships involved. It is a form of magnification (Costa and Fausto 2019, 214), that, in the Andoque
case, is best conceptualized as emanation from a given center, from one’s seat (kupa), itself linked with
the clan’s origin. Space and kinship thus emerge as potent idioms for articulating, generating, and
challenging asymmetries.
The shift from “articulation” to “generation,” or from representation to action, captures a key theme of
this dissertation. My analysis of Andoque mythology and its practical implications, along with people’s
sense of being dumbfounded when confronted with fi’du beings—or money, as I have suggested—
reveals that symbolization in Andoque ontology transcends the mere depiction of objects (or likely
subjects) in reality. It functions as an instrument of power, serving to contain this object (or subject),
revealing its potentials and vulnerabilities, with the aim, optimistically, of mastery. Within this context,
the notion of agnatic descent is pivotal. The term for myth, ḭpoíkó, which means “that which becomes a
father” or “that which originates from the father,” casts the patriclan as the protagonist in the endeavor
of symbolizing the world and making it manageable, much like Nietzsche’s concept of “will to power.”
However, my research has also demonstrated that knowledge is a scarce and contested resource in a
symbolic political economy—or cosmopolitical economy, as it centers around powerful nonhuman
entities whose assistance is far from assured.
Evidently, viewing nonhumans as agents within power relations—guided by the animist ontological
assumptions of my interlocutors—marks a significant departure from conventional social sciences and
political theory. In these fields, agency is often reserved for humans, who are considered the sole social,
moral, and political actors, while nonhumans are relegated to the status of objects for exploitation,
manipulation, or at best “actants” that influence outcomes (Latour 2005). However, my dissertation has
repeatedly emphasized a model of sociality where the interaction between two individuals invariably
includes an additional, non-physically human actor, such as shared food or coca powder, or the maloca

504

in which they sit. This broadening of the social realm introduces a level of instability to power
asymmetries within specific relationships, as these asymmetries are contingent upon prior established
imbalances between human and nonhuman actors, which may shift due to events within this or other
inter-human relations involving the same human participant. However, as both my research and prior
studies have demonstrated (Descola 2005, 31–32, 488–490), animism is an inherently creative and
dynamic ontology, characterized by the capacity for manipulation of actors and their agency: a sorcerer
taking the form of a jaguar and turning his victim into game, a grandfather changing meat given to his
grandchild to a fruit, or an Andoque captain transforming rubber trees into manioc plant. Therefore, the
potential to manipulate or reduce the agency of nonhuman entities exists as a viable action, yet this
diminishment is unlikely to be permanent or to reduce the nonhuman entirely to an object.
A key finding of this dissertation is the correlation between agnatic ideology and the reduction of
agency, or the near objectification, of affinal Others. Beyond the previously discussed concept of clanbased symbolization, I have traced the growing aspirations for patrilineal continuity and asymmetry in
affinal exchange to the Andoque’s desire for demographic growth following the rubber genocide and
their participation in the region’s extractive economy. Lastly, I delineated the complex power relations
formed through predatory and trade exchanges between the Andoque, non-Indigenous agents, and
nonhuman entities, where the agency of the latter is simultaneously manipulated or minimized, feared,
and required to assist the Andoque in achieving various goals and coexisting peacefully alongside these
and other nonhumans within their territory.
At this juncture, it is essential to return to the analogy drawn in the introduction between violence and
power/domination, on the one hand, and predation/alliance and familiarization and mastery, on the
other. Similar to violence, predation/alliance has the potential for symmetry and operates with
mechanisms inherent in the “given” plane of reality, which, in Andoque ontology, is affinity.
Conversely, familiarization and mastery resemble power/domination in producing asymmetry through
the “constructed” dimension of reality, which, as per the Andoque, is consanguinity. In their advocacy
for mastery as an idiom to unravel and comprehend Amazonian asymmetrical relations, Costa and
Fausto specify their preference for “dominion” over “domination,” as the latter denotes greater hierarchy
and relates to non-Amazonian practices like hospitality and domestication (2019, 217). Nonetheless, I
argue that the Andoque’s exercise or power through the “agnatic” version of familiarization and
mastery, which sometimes leads to a greater reduction of agency and subordination of the “pets”

505

conceptualized as orphans, indeed verges on domination. This suggests positioning the Andoque’s
animism closer to the hierarchical end of a spectrum that spans from egalitarian to hierarchical animism.
I will elaborate on this point by positioning my findings within the context of the ethnography of the
Caquetá-Putumayo and, subsequently, of broader Northwest Amazonia.
My study offered additional insights into the recent history of the People of the Center, which
anthropologists have previously interpreted through the transition from the “Basket of Darkness” to the
“Basket of Life,” and from the “Time of Animals” to the “Time of Abundance”—transformations
actively enacted by these peoples in the wake of the Casa Arana genocide (Echeverri 2010; Lucas 2019,
115–40). Among the Murui-Muina, Féénemɨna, and Bora, this shift is characterized by the dichotomy
between war, predation, and aggressive clan identities on the one hand, and peace, production,
reproduction, and ethnic inclusion, on the other. While the latter is celebrated and prioritized in public
discourse, the former is concealed and limited to the private realms of sorcery and healing. Similarly, for
the Andoque, post-genocide recovery also entailed the cessation of inter-clan warfare. Landaburu
(1993) described this period’s shift not only as one from war to peace but also from war to trade,
symbolized by the replacement of the old god Ñé’ñéfi, the central figure in myths, by the more
contemporary Egret of the Center, marking a transition from the cannibal eagle to the trading egret.
Following Landaburu’s analysis, I have examined these two mythic layers as representative of two
distinct cosmological and politico-economic systems of exchange: the cannibalistic-homosubstitutive
system and the captaincy-heterosubstitutive one. While the former aligns with the regional “Basket of
Darkness,” my exploration of the latter reveals essential elements of hierarchy and graded agency that,
while acknowledged in the People of the Center’s ethnography, are not directly associated with the
discourse of the “Basket of Life.” The baskets paradigm is closely linked to the scholarly interest in the
regional moral discourse, as the Basket of Life is “instrumental in constructing the ideology of a united
moral community” (Echeverri 2022, 78–79, my translation). Accordingly, anthropologists of the People
of the Center have emphasized morality as the key factor explaining a perceived ontological gap and
inherent asymmetries between humanity and nonhumanity (Echeverri 2001; Griffiths 1998; Londoño
Sulkin 2012). By contrast, due to the ambiguity of moral discourse among the Andoque, I was able to
uncover the predatory logic underlying it and demonstrate how this gap is actively produced and is
continuous with asymmetries among human agents.

506

Significantly, I have shown that the heterosubstitutive aspects of the captaincy system are compatible
not only with recent peaceful activities but also with the pre-genocide slave trade and the region-wide
practice of substitutive vegetal offerings to owner-persons, which likely predates the rubber boom by a
considerable margin, and which reflects the predatory logic of non-reciprocity. Thus, rather than framing
this as a diachronic rupture, and while acknowledging the recent consolidation of the egret mythical
layer, I highlight the synchronic coexistence of the two exchange systems both before and after the
genocide. My findings challenge the notion of a conclusive shift away from war and predation,
underlining the importance of the belligerent Multiplying Tree Dance and other literary and ritual
practices that have facilitated the Andoque’s resurgence in predatory prowess and their pursuit of
asymmetrical marital exchanges in the years following their regrouping. Lastly, my inquiry into ritual
transformations complicates the binary of war and peace. The prevalent appreciation for the red,
bellicose specialization and the devaluation of the white, “calm” specialization directs me to reframe this
shift as increasing emphasis on agnatic descent over affinal reciprocity. Adding to Lucas’ (2019, 138)
observation on the “verticalization,” in S. Hugh-Jones’ terms (1994), of Bora shamanism in the
transition from the Time of Animals to the Time of Abundance, my conclusion suggests that the recent
history of the People of the Center also involved a tectonic movement between the two competing
kinship conceptions underlying these two ideal types.
This conclusion also advances the argument recently presented by Lucas, in which she shifts the
discussion of ontological asymmetry between humans and nonhumans in the Caquetá-Putumayo region
from morality to politics. She posits that this asymmetry is modeled on the captain-orphan relationship.
By conceptualizing the captain-orphan hierarchy in terms of agency and investigating the connection
between the patriclan, its origins, and traditions with its members’ agency, my analysis leads to a
Hegelian-like conclusion: the captain-orphan hierarchy is a particular manifestation of the perpetual
ambition of individuals to utilize affines and members of other clans to achieve the objectives set forth
by their origin—whether as workers, or, as mythology suggests, as yarumo plants for coca preparation—
when this ambition encounters no substantial agency to oppose it. Consequently, the agency of the
affinal other may be diminished but never wholly extinguished. Thus, the increasing ontological
asymmetry between humans and nonhumans should be considered in the context of the evolving tension
between clan identity and affinal reciprocity.

507

This prompts us to expand the geographical scope of our discussion to the Tukanoan-Arawakan peoples
of Northwest Amazonia. The Tukanoans and Arawakans residing among them, such as the Yucuna and
Cabiyari (unlike those of the Upper Río Negro), are typically noted in regional anthropology for their
reciprocal exchanges with nonhumans that are analogous to their reciprocal affinal exchanges among
distinct language groups (Descola 1998; 2013, 345–52). This stands in stark contrast to the People of the
Center’s efforts to deny reciprocity with animals, whom they regard with aversion, and their disdainful
reference to these neighbors as “People of Yuruparí” or “People of Animals” (Karadimas 2005b, 30).
Thus, Echeverri (2001) has specifically delineated the ontological human-nonhuman asymmetry of the
People of the Center in contrast to the Tukanoans. Considering the significant role of Tukanoan
ethnography in shaping the concept of “perspectivism” (K. Århem 1993; Viveiros de Castro 1998, 471),
Londoño’s (2017) argument that the People of the Center possess a substantive version of perspectivism
can also be seen as a counterpoint to their “Tukanoization.”
Nonetheless, these groups share many similarities with the Andoque and other Peoples of the Center not
found among most other Amazonians. These similarities include notions of hierarchy, the political
economy of knowledge, consumption of coca powder, patrilocal residence, and most importantly, an
ideology of agnatic descent, as well as the concept of competition and rivalry among affinal groups.
However, a crucial distinction between the Andoque and these groups, potentially explaining their
differing attitudes towards nonhumans, lies in the fact that among the Tukanoans and Arawakans,
agnatic ideology and inter-clan competition are closely complemented by an alliance-based ideology and
an egalitarian ethos that fosters reciprocity between affines, alongside ritual and spatial mechanisms
facilitating the inclusion of matrilateral consanguines (K. Århem 1981; Cayón 2011; Estorniolo 2020,
18; Hill 1984; S. Hugh-Jones 1993). Such mechanisms are either absent or not as pronounced among the
Andoque. The white specialization, which seems to serve this role, is currently in decline, as is the
practice of naming daughters after their mothers’ clans. As a counter-image of the Tukanoans, the
Andoque’s less pronounced focus on inter-clan reciprocity parallels their perception of nonhumans as
enemies, with whom relations follow a logic of mutual predation. In this aspect, they resemble the
Arawak groups of the Upper Río Negro (Kurripaco, Wakuenai, and Baniwa), who are also patrilineal,
patrilocal, hierarchical, linguistically endogamous, and, like the People of the Center but unlike the
Tukanoans, practiced cannibalism in the past. However, similar to the Tukanoans, these Arawakans
maintain a Dravidian preference for cross-cousin marriage, reflecting a more immediate reciprocity
between affinal groups than observed among the Andoque.
508

In other words, in Northwest Amazonia, there exists a spectrum of ideologies: some exclusively
prioritize patriclan identity and hierarchy, while others complement them with affinal reciprocity, each
corresponding to differing perspectives on nonhumans and their agency. A pronounced emphasis on
affinal exchange with both humans and nonhumans, as seen with the Tukanoan peoples, tends to
correlate with a more ontological symmetry. Conversely, a strong emphasis on patrilineal continuity,
with fewer mechanisms in place to ensure affinal reciprocity, may lead to ontological asymmetries. In
the case of the Andoque, this is manifested by a tendency to diminish the agency of nonhumans, to
regard them more as resources than as social entities, and to view their worlds and origins as subordinate
to their own. This contrast may also be articulated through a moral discourse, which appears to play a
more significant role among neighboring Peoples of the Center than it does with the Andoque. Thus, I
propose that further investigation into the tension between patrilineality and affinity among other
Peoples of the Center, particularly examining how each pole relates to agency and interactions with
nonhumans, could illuminate the intricate links between morality, ontology, and power dynamics in
post- and possibly also pre-genocide periods.
Here it is noteworthy that the Tukanoan universe is not devoid of ontological asymmetry either.
Substantive perspectivism with a notion of “Real Humanity” reserved only for human-bodied persons
also features in Tukanoan mythology, particularly in layers related to “vertical shamanism” linked with
sacred paraphernalia transmitted within patrilines and embedded within social hierarchy (S. Hugh-Jones
2009). As I have shown in Chapter 9, the ɵpáha substitutive offering modality, which is based on the
perception of vegetal substances as hierarchically inferior to human souls, is only attested in Northwest
Amazonia, among these groups as well. While earlier analyses of human-nonhuman affinal reciprocity
within the Vaupés social complex highlighted human-nonhuman symmetry, particularly through
Reichel-Dolmatoff’s thermodynamic model (Reichel 1989; Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971; 1976; van der
Hammen 1992; von Hildebrand 1983) later studies on the Tukanoan Macuna emphasized the asymmetry
that reflects the privileged role of humans, especially shamans, in fertilizing nonhuman species and
maintaining cosmic order (K. Århem 2001; Cayón 2011; 2017). This asymmetry has clear agnatic
connotations, as is evident in the role of the yuruparí rituals transmitted within the patriclan—with their
secret flutes cult, male initiation, and strong association with agnatic ancestors—in ordering the cosmos,
fertilizing it and making it safe for humans (K. Århem 1981; Cayón 2010; Hill 1984; Cayón 2011; S.
Hugh-Jones 1979). Although the Andoque and other People of the Center often refer to these groups as
“the People of Yuruparí,” this ritual may not serve as the best hallmark for capturing the differences
509

between the two cultural complexes. Ethnographers of People of the Center have pointed out rituals that
show similarities to the yuruparí cult (Guyot 1972, 167; Londoño Sulkin 2000, 386; Lucas 2019, 342–
43), and Karadimas (2008) has impressively revealed continuities between this cult and the ceremonies
and myths of the Peoples of the Center, rooted in the model of the parasitic wasp and its reproductive
mode—recalling that Sḭ́ di, a central deity for the Andoque associated with ancestry and fertility, is a
wasp. As I have demonstrated, the symbol that captures the difference between the Tukanoan complex
and the People of the Center may well be their distinct forms of tobacco consumption—smoking or
sniffing versus using it as a paste, respectively. While tobacco is associated with affinal relatives
throughout Northwestern Amazonian mythology, the People of the Center’s practice of mixing it with
vegetal salt—linked with semen—serves to make it safe for the patriclan, and, among some of them, as
the patriclan’s very essence. This powerful substance’s role in dominating nonhumans is contingent
upon the prior domination of human affines.
Returning to the yuruparí ritual, the presence and strength of mechanisms that counterbalance such
agnatically-linked cults and the varying degrees of human-nonhuman asymmetry they entail are
significant. These differences may have implications for the strategies employed by each cultural
complex in engaging with extractivism and the contemporary “green economy.” As mentioned in
Chapter 14, the Andoque project their environmental intervention-related frustrations and fears onto the
Indigenous peoples of the Tukanoan complex, specifically because of the latter’s increased reciprocity
with nonhumans.170 A comparative study could investigate the similarities and differences in how each
complex interacts with environmental agencies, considering the possible correlation with perceptions of
nonhumans as enemies, allies, or “orphans.”
The presence of hierarchical animism among the Peoples of the Center, as well as the Tukanoans and
Arawakans, is evidenced by their practice of substituting animal and human souls with vegetal offerings
(K. Århem 1996, 192; van der Hammen 1992, 317; von Hildebrand 1983, 57), suggesting that hierarchy
can coexist with animism, as observed in Southeast Asia (K. Århem 2015b; Sprenger 2015). Fausto’s
work also supports the existence of agentive hierarchy in Amazonia, indexed by the food chain (Fausto
2007a, 503). Contrary to Descola’s (2001, 113) argument, my study demonstrates that heterosubstitutive
exchanges—a characteristic of hierarchical animism—occur in Lowland South America with indigenous
Echeverri: “Perhaps, the People of Animals would better suit the environmental notion of the ‘ecologically noble savage’”
(2022, 273, n.91; my translation).

170

510

items, not just those introduced by non-Indigenous agents. The heterosubstitutive logic of the Andoque’s
offerings cannot be attributed solely to the influence of the slave trade. This is clear from the
heterosubstitutive offerings of the Tukanoans and Arawakans, who only traded their Makú servants for
non-Indigenous goods on rare occasions (Santos Granero 2009b, 70). According to Descola,
heterosubstitution requires instrumental and subordinating dispositions towards nonhumans, as are
evident in animal domestication, which is absent in Amazonia. He suggests that Amazonian societies
only display heterosubstitutive homologies between natural kinds and artifacts, on one hand, and
persons, on the other, in societies with secret flute cults, where these elements are nonetheless
considered inalienable possessions (Descola 2001, 111–13). For K. Århem, animal husbandry is a key
condition for the development of hierarchical animism—which entails heterosubstitutive sacrifices—
alongside village-centered domestication, where the forest is cleared for human habitation (2015a).
Building on this, I argue that plant domestication and cultivation can also underpin hierarchical animism
and the heterosubstitution it facilitates, particularly when linked with agnatic descent notions.
In Andoque mythology, an agnatic emphasis reshapes the typical Amazonian narrative, which often
attributes the origin of various cultural items and practices to exchanges with affinal relatives, either
through gifting or theft (Lévi-Strauss 1964). Andoque myths portray the acquisition of the three main
cultivars—manioc, tobacco, and coca—as assertions of agnatic agency, simultaneously diminishing or
contesting the agency of the affinal relatives from whom these vital plants were claimed (M1; M3; M14;
M12). As I have argued, the sexual ethic surrounding the production of coca and tobacco among this and
other People of the Center, as well as some of their myths (García 2018, 412–22; Karadimas 2005b,
129–42), reflect a similar notion. It is in this light that we should consider Echeverri’s (2001) argument,
which posits horticulture and the “decontamination” involved in processing foodstuffs, rather than
hunting, as central to the ethos and cosmology of these peoples. Such “agnatization” represents a more
dominant relationship with plants and eventually allows for greater freedom in trading their derivatives
than common Amazonian appropriative acts of familiarization. While the Andoque may not engage in
an ancestor cult, hold elaborate funerary rites, or possess a robust conception of “the good death,” the
pronounced agnatic ideology they share with other Northwest Amazonians reflects a notion of ancestry,
which, in its more developed form, distinguishes hierarchic animism from egalitarian animism, as the
comparison between Southeast Asia and Amazonia shows (K. Århem 2015a, 289–92). Therefore, we
may see the Andoque’s animism as positioned halfway between these two models.

511

As Descola suggests in his comparison between Melanesia and Amazonia, “it seems reasonable to
assume that what may account for the greater institutional complexity of Melanesia is the multiplicity of
options opened up by the various combinations between what we may call ‘homosubstitution’ and
‘heterosubstitution’” (2001, 110). Similarly, in Andoque animism, power dynamics involve alternating
between these two types of exchange in a bidirectional movement: from the “trading egret” and the
captaincy system to the “cannibal eagle” and the cannibalistic cosmo-economic system reminiscent of a
Clastrian “society against the State,” with its foregrounding of violence over domination, the mercurial
nature of power, and the looming threat to eat the captain’s son, thus denying him continuity (see M9).
Power allows those attuned to Sḭ́ di and his transformed form, Egret of the River Source, to successfully
navigate relationships with humans and nonhumans, appropriating more bodies, agencies, vital
principles, and goods, than they relinquish. Despite the waning of the captaincy institution—as
evidenced by the diminished economic role of captains, decreased assistance in dance organization and
maloca construction, and the emergence of alternative leadership roles among the younger members—
the heterosubstitutive rationale that underpins it remains pervasive within the Andoque cosmos and
society. Owner-persons and ordinary members are still seen as captains who manage exchangeable
orphan/crops.
However, through my conversations with Andoque men and women of various ages and clans, including
their non-Andoque spouses, I learned that the potential for hierarchy and asymmetry in their ontology
does not necessarily mean that Andoque members are comfortable or feel secure in their current position
within power dynamics involving non-Indigenous agents, nonhuman entities, and even among
themselves. They express genuine concern over non-reciprocal exchanges with Whites, illnesses and
misfortunes resulting from owner-persons retaliating against those who exploit their personnel,
insufficient ritual actions to appease these entities, the allure of drug use among the youth, the prevailing
distrust between captains, cabildo leaders, and other members, the diminished authority of captains in
the eyes of younger or non-maloquero individuals, and the lack of vital competition among them. Given
the historical backdrop of the Andoque’s genocidal exploitation, near demographic extinction and
unfathomable loss of oral traditions, increasing assimilation into Colombian society, and ongoing
precarious position in the regional economy, it is pertinent to note that this research has examined power
within a society enduring a persistent crisis of power.

512

Key factors in this crisis include the constructs of “community” and its territorial counterpart, “reserve.”
Due to the broad scope of this dissertation, these have not been analyzed here as actors in power
dynamics, particularly those among the Andoque as members of distinct clans. However, the interrelated
concepts of clan identity and the rivalry and suspicion among clans provide much of the necessary
background to understand the challenges faced by a “community” composed of different clans. The
collaboration among clans within a shared framework is often compromised by ongoing disputes.
Similar to other People of the Center grappling with the concept of an “Indigenous community”
(Echeverri 2009), the Andoque seem to struggle with reconciling clan with community membership.
Yiñékɒ’s remarkable feat of uniting individuals of diverse “origins” and aligning them with a common
project—if it indeed functioned as seamlessly as members recall—did not survive him. In retrospect,
this unity appears to have hinged on the unique conditions of that period, such as the immediate trauma
of the genocide and his personal charisma. Accepting Landaburu’s (1993) persuasive argument that
Yiñékɒ anchored his group’s overarching, supra-clan identity in the name “People of the Axe,” with its
connotations of trade, labor, and productivity, it becomes clear that the Andoque’s involvement in a
collective economic endeavor, namely rubber tapping, was pivotal in uniting diverse clans. It is to be
hoped that the communal framework for participating in contemporary environmental initiatives,
particularly those generating income flux like carbon trading, may likewise be a significant factor in
fostering effective cooperation among members of different clans in other areas.
Things are far from ideal on a clan basis, either. Precisely one year prior to penning this conclusion, on
December 24, 2022, I awoke to a text message from an Andoque woman residing in Bogotá. She
conveyed the harrowing news that my dear friend Lisimaco, Fisi’s son, had been murdered the day
before. The perpetrator, whom I knew well and with whom I had stayed during my fieldwork as well,
was his patrilateral cousin. The murder, carried out under the influence of alcohol acquired with profits
from an environmental project, was also, as witnesses have informed me, a deliberate act, culminating a
series of violent exchanges between the families of Fisi and his brother under similar circumstances. I
was immediately reminded of the cannibal eagle tale—the Eagle Clan’s downfall, as I had been told, is
its unrestrained anger. This myth, along with the concepts of familiarization and resisting affinization,
which until then had been merely academic to me, took on a chillingly tangible form, becoming a matter
of life and death. Again, Nénéfi failed to rein in his voracious “pet,” or tutelary spirit, nourished by his

513

wife until it chose to prey on its owner’s kin and personnel.171 Could this tragic misidentification of kin
be the result of “affinization” by money that had not been properly converted into salt, having not been
tempered through the symbolization of myth and ritual to subjugate it to one’s project of well-being and
prosperity, leading men to regard their cousins as enemies instead? Salt itself was capricious, as
Lisimaco once pointed out when I stumbled on a slick forest path under the burden of the plants we had
collected to prepare salt, and when he shouldered my load on our journey back, ensuring that when
cooked, not a speck of this vital substance would be lost, so crucial is it for managing the world. But
perhaps these are simply the follies of Lady Salt’s elder sons, who allowed themselves to be beguiled by
strangers along their path.172 It may be that the youngest son will soon see the salt plant for what it truly
is, hold it tight, and dominate it.

Figure 28. Lisimaco Andoke Macuna in the “Sun’s Garden” (Photo taken by the author)

171
172

See M9.
See M13.

514

Bibliographical References
Allard, Olivier. 2010. “Morality and Emotion in the Dynamics of an Amerindian Society (Warao,
Orinoco Delta, Venezuela).” PhD Diss., University of Cambridge.
Anderson, David. 1998. “Property as a Way of Knowing on Evenki Lands in Arctic Siberia.” In
Property Relations: Renewing the Anthropological Tradition, edited by C.M. HANN, 64–84.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Andoke, Levy. 2011. “Para volverse gente regresaron al territorio de origen para dejar de ser huérfanos:
Reconstrucción social y territorial entre los Pɵɵsiɵhɵ.” Undergraduate thesis, Universidad
Externado de Colombia.
Andoke, Levy Andoke, Eliran Arazi, Hernando Castro Suárez, Thomas F. Griffiths, and Esteban
Gutiérrez Sánchez. 2023. “Amazonian Visions of Visión Amazonía: Indigenous Peoples’
Perspectives on a Forest Conservation and Climate Programme in the Colombian Amazon.”
Oryx 57 (3): 335–49.
Andoque, Iris, and Hernando Castro. 2013. La vida de la chagra: Saberes tradicionales y prácticas
locales para la adaptación al cambio climático – comunidad indígena el Guacamayo. Bogota:
Tropenbos Internacional.
Andoque Andoque Hernando (Fisi) and Jon Landaburu. Forthcoming. Diccionario de la langua del
pueblo Gente de Hacha-Andoque del Amazonas. Resguardo del Aduche and Bogotá: Instituto
Caro y Cuervo.
Andrello, Geraldo. 2006. Cidade do índio: Transformações e cotidiano em Iauaretê. Rio de Janeiro:
Universidad Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
———. 2010. “Falas, objetos e corpos: Autores indígenas no Alto Rio Negro.” Revista Brasileira de
Ciências Sociais 25: 5–26.
Figalli de Angelo, Samir Ricardo. 2020. “Livros e dabucuris. Continuidades e transformações nas
Formas de atualizações de diferenças entre os grupos desana do Alto Rio Negro.” Revista de
Antropologia 63 (1): 83–104.
Ansión, Juan (ed.). 1989. Pishtacos: De verdugos a sacaojos. Lima: Tare.

515

Appadurai, Arjun. 1986. “Introduction: Commodities and the Politics of Value.” In The Social Life of
Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, edited by Arjun Appadurai, 3–63. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Arendt, Hannah. 1969. On Violence. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers.
Århem, Kaj. 1981. Makuna Social Organization: A Study in Descent, Alliance, and the Formation of
Corporate Groups in the North-Western Amazon. Uppsala: Academiae Upsaliensis.
———. 1993. “Ecosofía macuna.” In La selva humanizada: Ecología alternativa en el trópico húmedo
colombiano, edited by François Correa Rubio. Bogotá: Instituto Colombiano de Antropología,
Fondo FEN, Fondo Editorial CEREC.
———. 1996. “The Cosmic Food Web: Human-Nature Relatedness in the Northwest Amazon.” In
Nature and Society: Anthropological Perspectives, edited by Philippe Descola and Gisli Pálsson,
185–204. London: Routledge.
———. 2015a. “Southeast Asian Animism: A Dialogue with Amerindian Perspectivism.” In Animism in
Southeast Asia, edited by Kaj Århem and Guido Sprenger, 279–301. London and New York:
Routledge.
———. 2015b. “Southeast Asian Animism in Context.” In Animism in Southeast Asia, edited by Kaj
Århem and Guido Sprenger, 3–30. London and New York: Routledge.
Århem, Nikolas. 2014. “Forests, Spirits and High Modernist Development: A Study of Cosmology and
Change among the Katuic Peoples in the Uplands of Laos and Vietnam.” Uppsala: Uppsala
Universitet.
Arregui, Aníbal G. 2019. “Positional Wildness: Amazonian Ribeirinhos, Pink Dolphins and Interspecies
Affections.” Ethnos, 85 (1): 1–24.
Ashcroft, Caroline. 2021. Violence and Power in the Thought of Hannah Arendt. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Audren, Else. 2017. “Les maîtres de l’or: Ethnographie et histoire d’une exploitation aurifère
amérindienne (Andoque, Amazonie colombienne).” M.A. Thesis, École des Hautes Études en
Sciences Sociales.
Austin, John L. 1962. How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

516

Bachrach, Peter, and Morton S. Baratz. 1962. “Two Faces of Power.” American Political Science
Review 56 (4): 947–52.
Basso, Ellen B. 1987. “The Implications of a Progressive Theory of Dreaming.” In Dreaming:
Anthropological and Psychological Interpretation, edited by Barbara Tedlock, 86–104.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Benjamin, Walter. 1996. “Critique of Violence.” In Selected Writings, edited by Marcus Bullock and
Michael W. Jennings, Volume 1, 236–52. Cambridge: Belknap Press.
Bermúdez Liévano, Andrés. 2023. “Colombia: Las dos comunidades indígenas excluidas de un proyecto
de carbono en su territorio.” Mongabay, March 30, 2023.
https://es.mongabay.com/2023/03/colombia-comunidades-indigenas-excluidas-de-un-proyectode-carbono-en-suterritorio/?fbclid=IwAR1JEKjjScGwx3ffWXUa40birLj8chbb_JVx4jRrGdpoxMStgNvSlA2PuA
A.
Bessire, Lucas, and David Bond. 2014. “Ontological Anthropology and the Deferral of Critique.”
American Ethnologist 41 (3): 440–56.
Beuf, Alice. 2019. “Los significados del territorio. Ensayo interpretativo de los discursos sobre el
territorio de movimientos sociales en Colombia.” Scripta Nova 23: 624.
Bidou, Patrice. 1998. “Découpez la chose en morceaux (interpréter en Amazonie).” Le Fait de l’Analyse
4: 91–110.
———. 1999. “Des fantômes et des hommes: Une topologie amazonienne de l’inconscient.” L’Homme,
149: 73–82.
Bird-David, Nurit, and Danny Naveh. 2008. “Relational Epistemology, Immediacy, and Conservation:
Or, What Do the Nayaka Try to Conserve?” Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature & Culture
2 (1): 55–73.
Blaser, Mario. 2009. “The Threat of the Yrmo: The Political Ontology of a Sustainable Hunting
Program.” American Anthropologist 111 (1): 10–20.

517

———. 2013. “Notes towards a Political Ontology of ‘environmental’ Conflicts.” In Contested
Ecologies: Dialogues in the South on Nature and Knowledge, edited by Leslie Green, 13–27.
Cape Town: Capitil Press.
Bonilla, Oiara. 2005. “O bom patrão e o inimigo voraz: Predação e comércio na cosmologia Paumari.”
Mana 11 (1): 41–66.
———. 2016. “Parasitism and Subjection: Modes of Paumari Predation.” In Ownership and Nurture:
Studies in Native Amazonian Property Relations, edited by Marc Brightman, Carlos Fausto, and
Vanessa Grotti, 110–32. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Oxford.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1986. “The Forms of Capital.” In The Handbook of Theory and Research for the
Sociology of Education, edited by J.G. Richardson, 241–58. Westport: Greenwood.
Bourgue, François. 1976. “Los caminos de los hijos del cielo: Estudio socio-territorial de los Kawillary
del Cananarí y del Apaporis.” Revista Colombiana de Antropología 20: 101–46.
Brightman, Marc. 2008. “Plants, Property and Trade among the Trio and Wayana of Southern
Suriname.” In Pueblos indígenas, plantas y mercados: Amazonía y Gran Chaco, edited by Marc
Lenaerts and Ana María Spadafora, 153–68. Zeta Books.
———. 2010. “Creativity and Control: Property in Guianese Amazonia.” Journal de la Société des
Américanistes 96 (1): 135–67.
Brightman, Marc, Carlos Fausto, and Vanessa Grotti. 2016. “Introduction: Altering Ownership in
Amazonia.” In Ownership and Nurture: Studies in Native Amazonian Property Relations, 1–35.
New York and Oxford: Berghahn.
Brockington, Dan, and Rosaleen Duffy, eds. 2011. Capitalism and Conservation. Oxford: Wiley
Blackwell.
Buchillet, Dominique. 2000. “Contas de vidro, enfeites de Branco e ‘potes de malária’: Epidemiologia e
representações de doenças infecciosas entre os Desana do Alto Rio Negro.” In Pacificando o
Branco: Cosmologias do contato no Norte-Amazônico, edited by Bruce Albert and Rita Alcida
Ramos, 113–36. São Paulo: UNESP.
———. 2004. “Sorcery Beliefs, Transmission of Shamanic Knowledge, and Therapeutic Practice
among the Desana of the Upper Río Negro Region, Brazil.” In In Darkness and Secrecy: The

518

Anthropology of Assault Sorcery and Witchcraft in Amazonia, edited by Neil L. Whitehead and
Robin Wright, 109–31. Durham: Duke University Press.
Buitron, Natalia, and Grégory Deshoullière. 2023. “Inculturer le marché: Predations capitalistes parmi
les Shuar de l’Amazonie equatorienne.” Terrain 78: 26–45.
Burman, Anders. 2018. “Are Anthropologists Monsters? An Andean Dystopian Critique of Extractivist
Ethnography and Anglophone-Centric Anthropology.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 8
(1–2): 48–64.
De la Cadena, Marisol. 2010. “Indigenous Cosmopolitics in the Andes: Conceptual Reflections beyond
‘Politics’.” Cultural Anthropology 25 (2): 334–70.
Candre Kɨneraɨ, Hipólito, and Juan Álvaro Echeverri Restrepo. 2008. Tabaco frío, coca dulce: Palabras
del anciano Kɨneraɨ de la tribu Cananguchal para sanar y alegrar el corazón de sus huérfanos.
Bogotá: Guadalupe.
Canetti, Elias. 1981. Crowds and Power. New York: Continuum.
Carneiro da Cunha, Manuela. 1978. Os mortos e os outros: Uma análise do sistema funerário e da
noção de pessoa entre os índios krahó. São Paulo: HUCITEC.
Carsten, Janet, and Stephen Hugh-Jones. 1995. “Introduction: About the House—Lévi-Strauss and
Beyond.” In About the House: Lévi-Strauss and Beyond, edited by Janet Carsten and Stephen
Hugh-Jones, 1–46. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Casement, Roger. 1912. “Correspondence Respecting the Treatment of British Colonial Subjects and
Native Indians Employed in the Collection of Rubber in the Putumayo District.” House of
Commons Sessional Papers 68 (February): 1–65.
Casement, Roger Sir. 1997. The Amazon Journal of Roger Casement. Edited and with an Introduction
by Angus Mitchell. London: Anaconda Editions.
Cattelino, Jessica R. 2008. High Stakes: Florida Seminole Gaming and Sovereignty. Durham: Duke
University Press.
Cayón, Luis. 2010. “El alma de la filiación. Contribución al estudio de la organización social de los
Tukano Oriental.” Boletín de Antropología Universidad de Antioquia 18 (35) : 92–115.

519

———. 2011. “Alianza Perpetua: Bases del manejo ecológico en el Noroeste Amazónico.” Avá 19:
135–163.
———. 2017. Pienso, luego creo: La teoría makuna del mundo. Terrenos etnográficos. Bogotá:
Instituto Colombiano de Antropología e Historia.
Chaumeil, Jean-Pierre. 2010. “Des sons et des esprits-maîtres en Amazonie amérindienne.” Ateliers
d’anthropologie, 34. Http://journals.openedition.org/ateliers/8546
Chirif, Alberto. 2017. Después del caucho. Lima: CAAAP, Lluvia Editores.
Clastres, Pierre. 1989. Society against the State: Essays in Political Anthropology. New York: Zone
Books.
Cohen, Percy. 1969. “Theories of Myth.” Man 4 (3): 337–53.
Conklin, Beth A. 1997. “Body Paint, Feathers, and VCRs: Aesthetics and Authenticity in Amazonian
Activism.” American Ethnologist 24 (4): 711–37.
Conklin, Beth A., and Laura R. Graham. 1995. “The Shifting Middle Ground: Amazonian Indians and
Eco-Politics.” American Anthropologist 97 (4): 695–710.
Cornejo Chaparro, Manuel, and María Eugenia Yllia Miranda. 2009. “Percepciones, representaciones y
ausencias: Narrativas e imágenes de la época del caucho.” In Imaginario e imágenes de la época
del caucho: Los sucesos del Putumayo, edited by Alberto Chirif and Manuel Cornejo Chaparro,
170–201. Lima: IWGIA, CAAAP, UCP.
Correa Rubio, François. 1996. Por el camino de la anaconda remedio: Dinámica de la organización
social entre los Taiwano del Vaupés. Bogotá : Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Costa, Luiz. 2010. “The Kanamari Body-Owner. Predation and Feeding in Western Amazonia.” Journal
de La Société Des Américanistes 96 (1): 169–92.
———. 2017. The Owners of Kinship: Asymmetrical Relations in Indigenous Amazonia. Chicago: Hau
books.
Costa, Luiz, and Carlos Fausto. 2010. “The Return of the Animists: Recent Studies of Amazonian
Ontologies.” Religion and Society 1 (1): 89–109.
———. 2019. “The Enemy, the Unwilling Guest, and the Jaguar Host. An Amazonian Story.”
L’Homme 231–232: 195–226.
520

Crévaux, Jules. 1883. Voyages dans l’Amérique du Sud. Paris: Hachette et Cie.
Crook, Tony. 2007. Anthropological Knowledge, Secrecy and Bolivip, Papua New Guinea: Exchanging
Skin. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cure, Salima. 2010. “El cortacabezas: Construcción y circulación de un rumor en la frontera amazónica
de Colombia, Perú y Brasil.” Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
———. 2020. “El uso inapropiado de la coca o bien, la bonanza de la cocaína desde la perspectiva
cultural de los indígenas que hacen uso del mambe y ambíl.” Revista Antropológicas 31 (1):
169–95.
Da Matta, Roberto. 1982. A Divided World: Apinayé Social Structure. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Dahl, Robert A. 1957. “The Concept of Power.” Behavioral Science 2: 201–15.
De Wavrin, Robert . 1948. Les indiens sauvages de l’Amérique du sud: Vie sociale. Paris: Payot.
Déléage, Pierre. 2009. Le chant de l’anaconda: L’apprentissage du chamanisme chez les Sharanahua
(Amazonie occidentale). Nanterre: Société d’ethnologie.
Descola, Philippe. 1986. La nature domestique. Symbolisme et praxis dans l’écologie des Achuar. Paris:
Editions de la Maison de sciences de l’homme.
———. 1988. “La chefferie amérindienne dans l’anthropologie politique.” Revue Française de Science
Politique 38 (5): 818–27.
———. 1989. “Head-Shrinkers versus Shrinks: Jivaroan Dream Analysis.” Man 24 (3): 439–50.
———. 1992. “Societies of Nature and the Nature of Society.” In Conceptualizing Society, edited by
Adam Kuper, 107–26. London: Routledge.
———. 1994a. “Pourquoi les indiens d’Amazonie n’ont-ils pas domestiqué le pécari ? Généalogie des
objets et anthropologie de l’objectivation.” In De la préhistoire aux missiles balistiques, edited
by Bruno Latour and Pierre Lemonnier, 329–44. Paris: La Découverte.
———. 1994b. In the Society of Nature: A Native Ecology in Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

521

———. 1996. “Constructing Natures: Symbolic Ecology and Social Practice.” In Nature and Society:
Anthropological Perspectives, edited by Philippe Descola and Gísli Pálsson, 82–102. New York:
Routledge.
———. 1998. “Estrutura ou Sentimento: A relação com o animal na Amazônia.” Mana 4: 23–45.
———. 2001. “The Genres of Gender: Local Models and Global Paradigms in the Comparison of
Amazonia and Melanesia.” In Gender in Amazonia and Melanesia, edited by Thomas A. Gregor
and Donald Tuzin, 91–114. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 2005. Par-Delà Nature et Culture. Paris: Gallimard.
———. 2013. Beyond Nature and Culture. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
———. 2014. “Modes of Being and Forms of Predication.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4:
271–80.
———. 2023. “Varieties of Animism, in Amazonia and Southeast Asia.” The Li Yih-yuan Memorial
Lecture, Academia Sinica, Institute of Ethnology, Taipei, November 20, 2023.
Douglas, Mary. 1982. Natural Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology. New York: Pantheon.
Duivenvoorden, Joost F., and Johanna M. Lips. 1993. Ecología del paisaje del Medio Caquetá. Santafé
de Bogotá: Tropenbos Colombia.
Dumont, Louis. 1980. Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications. New Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
———. 2013. “On Value: The Radcliffe-Brown Lecture in Social Anthropology, 1980.” HAU: Journal
of Ethnographic Theory 3 (1): 287–315.
Eade, John. 1992. “Pilgrimage and Tourism at Lourdes, France.” Annals of Tourism Research 19 (1):
18–32.
Echeverri Restrepo, Juan Álvaro. 1997. “The People of the Center of the World: A Study in Culture,
History, and Orality in the Colombian Amazon.” PhD Diss., The New School for Social
Research.
———. 2001. “La naturaleza es bagazo y la humanidad almidón: Visión del medio natural desde los
grupos que consumen ambíl de tabaco.” Boletín de Antropología 15 (32): 13–30.

522

———. 2002. “The First Love of a Young Man: Salt and Sexual Education among the Uitoto Indians of
Lowland Colombia.” In The Anthropology of Love and Anger, edited by Joanna Overing and
Alan Passes, 33–45. New York: Routledge.
———. 2005. “Territory as Body and Territory as Nature: Intercultural Dialogue?” In The Land within:
Indigenous Territory and Perception of the Environment, edited by Alexandre Surrallés and
Pedro García Hierro, 230–46. Copenhagen: Centraltrykkreiet Skive.
———.2009. “Qué es una comunidad indígena? Identidad y autonomía territorial en tres comunidades
de la Gente de Centro.” In Actas del Simposio “Etnicidade, Autonomias Indígenas, e Fronteiras
na Amazônia” del 53 Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, México, 1–15.
———. 2010. “To Heal or to Remember: Indian Memory of the Rubber Boom and Roger Casement’s
‘Basket of Life.’” ABEI Journal 12: 49–64.
———. 2015. “Substances and Persons: On the Culinary Space of the People of the Centre.” Tipití:
Journal of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 13 (2): 91–104.
———. 2022. La gente del centro del mundo: Curación de la historia en una sociedad amazónica.
Bogota: Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Echeverri Restrepo, Juan Alvaro, and Edmundo Pereira. 2005. “'Mambear coca não é pintar a boca de
verde’: Notas sobre a origem e o uso ritual da coca amazônica.” In O uso ritual das plantas de
poder, edited by Beatriz Cauiby Labate and Sandra Lucia Goulart, 117–85. Campinas: Mercado
de Letras/FAPESP.
Echeverri Restrepo, Juan Alvaro, Oscar Román Jitdutjaaño, and Simón Román. 2001. “La sal de monte:
Un ensayo de ‘halofitogenografía’ uitoto.” In Imani mundo: Estudios en la Amazonia
colombiana, edited by Carlos E. Franky Calvo and Carlos G. Zárate, 397–477. Bogotá:
Unibiblos.
Echeverri Restrepo, Juan Alvaro, and Oscar Enokakuiodo Román-Jitdutjaaño. 2013. “Ash Salts and
Bodily Affects: Witoto Environmental Knowledge as Sexual Education.” Environmental
Research Letters 8 (1): 015034.
Eichler, Lauren, and David Baumeister. 2018. “Hunting for Justice: An Indigenous Critique of the North
American Model of Wildlife Conservation.” Environment and Society 9: 75–90.

523

Erikson, Philippe. 1987. “De l’apprivoisement à l’approvisionnement: Chasse, alliance et familiarisation
en Amazonie amériendienne.” Techniques & Culture 9 : 105–40.
Escobar, Arturo. 1999. El final del salvaje: Naturaleza, cultura y política en la antropología
contemporánea. Bogotá: CEREC, ICAN.
Espinosa Arango, Mónica Lucía. 1995. Convivencia y poder político entre los Andoques. Bogotá:
Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Estorniolo, Milena. 2020. “Manger (avec) l’ennemi: mythe, subsistence et alimentation chez les Baniwa
et Kuripako (Amazonie, Brésil).” PhD Diss., École des hautes études en sciences sociales.
Estrada Añokazi, Lena Estrada. 2017. “Soberanía del conocimiento tradicional indígena en la Amazonía
colombiana—el pueblo Andoke de Aduche.” PhD Diss., Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya.
ETSA. 1996. “Los alcances de la noción de ‘cultura’ en la educación intercultural. Exploración de un
ejemplo: Sociedad y Cultura Bora.” In Educación e interculturalidad en los Andes y La
Amazonía, edited by Juan Godenzzi Alegre, 187–294. Cuzco: Centro de Estudios Regionales
Andinos Bartolomé de Las Casas.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1976. Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Ewart, Elizabeth. 2000. “Living with Each Other: Selves and Alters amongst the Panará of Central
Brazil.” PhD Diss., London School of Economics and Political Science.
Fausto, Carlos. 1999. “Of Enemies and Pets: Warfare and Shamanism in Amazonia.” American
Ethnologist 26: 933–56.
———. 2004. “A Blend of Blood and Tobacco: Shamans and Jaguars among the Parakana of Eastern
Amazonia.” In In Darkness and Secrecy: The Anthropology of Assault Sorcery and Witchcraft in
Amazonia, edited by Neil L. Whitehead and Robin Wright, 179–201. Durham: Duke University
Press.
———. 2007a. “Feasting on People: Eating Animals and Humans in Amazonia.” Current Anthropology
48 (4): 497–530.

524

———. 2007b. “If God Were a Jaguar: Cannibalism and Christianity among the Guarani (16th–20th
Centuries).” In Time and Memory in Indigenous Amazonia: Anthropological Perspectives, edited
by Carlos Fausto and Michael Heckenberger, 74–105. Gainsville: University Press of Florida.
———. 2008. “Donos demais: Maestria e domínio na Amazônia.” Mana 4: 329–66.
———. 2020. Art Effects: Image, Agency, and Ritual in Amazonia. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Fausto, Carlos, and Luiz Costa. 2013. “Feeding (and Eating): Reflections on Strathern’s ‘Eating (and
Feeding)’.” The Cambridge Journal of Anthropology 31 (1): 156–62.
———. 2021. “Afinidades e diferenças: Algumas considerações sobre a política da Consideração (Parte
1).” Mana 27 (3): 1–29.
———. 2022. “Afinidades e diferenças: Algumas considerações sobre a política da Consideração (Parte
2).” Mana 28 (1): 1–33.
Fiorini, Marcelo, and Christopher Ball. 2006. “Le commerce de La culture, la médecine rituelle et le
Coca-Cola.” Gradhiva, 4 : 97–113.
Fisher, William. 2000. Rain Forest Exchanges: Industry and Community on an Amazonian Frontier.
Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Fontaine, Laurent. 2003. “El mambe frente al dinero entre los Yucuna del Amazonas.” Revista
Colombiana de Antropología 39: 173–201.
Foucault, Michel. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Vintage Books.
———. 1980. The History of Sexuality. Volume I. New York: Random House.
———. 1994. “The Ethic of Care for the Self as a Practice of Freedom.” In The Essential Works of
Michel Foucault 1954-1984, Volume 1. Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth, edited by Paul Rabinow,
281–301. New York: The New Press.
Franky, Carlos, and Dany Mahecha. 2018. “Políticas nativas contemporáneas, chamanismo y proyectos
de desarrollo entre los Tanimuca y Macuna del Bajo Apaporis (Amazonía colombiana.” Boletín
de Antropología 33: 77–101.

525

Galli, Elisa. 2012. Migrar transformándose: género y experiencias oníricas entre los runas de la
Amazonía ecuatoriana. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
García, Oscar Iván. 2016. “Danzando Fakariya: Los bailes uitotos como modelo de organización social
en la Amazonía.” Bulletin de l’Institut Français d’études Andines 45 (1): 39–62.
———. 2018. “Rafue ite: Ethnographie d’un bal rituel amazonien (Murui-Muina-Uitoto, Amazonie
colombienne).” PhD Diss., École des hautes études en sciences sociales.
Garland, David. 1990. Punishment and Modern Society: A Study in Social Theory. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Gasché, Jürg. 1972. “L’habitat witoto: ‘Progrès’ et tradition.” Journal de La Société Des Américanistes,
61: 177–214.
———. 1976. “Les fondements de l’organisation sociale des Indiens Witoto et l’illusion exogamique.”
In Actes du XLIIe Congrès International des Américanistes, 141–61.
———. 2003. “Nueve hipótesis sobre la naturaleza del cazicazgo huitoto.” Paper presented at the 51°
Congreso Internacional des Americanistas, July 14–18, 2003, Santiago de Chile.
———. 2009. “La sociedad de la ‘Gente del Centro.’” In A Multimedia Documentation of the
Languages of the People of the Center. Online Publication of Transcribed and Translated Bora,
Ocaina, Nonuya, Resígaro, and Witoto Audio and Video Recordings with Linguistic and
Ethnographis Annotations and Descriptions, edited by Frank Seifart, Doris Fragua, Jürg Gasché,
and Juan Álvaro Echeverri. Nimega: DOBES-MPI.
Gluckman, Max. 2014. “Moral Crises: Magical and Secular Solutions. The Marett Lectures, 1964 and
1965.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4 (2): 369–405.
Goddard, Michael. 2000. “Of Cabbages and Kin: The Value of an Analytic Distinction between Gifts
and Commodities.” Critique of Anthropology 20 (2): 137–51.
Godelier, Maurice. 1982. La production des grands hommes: Pouvoir et domination masculine chez les
Baruya de Nouvelle-Guinée. Paris: Fayard.
Goffman, Erving. 1958. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh
Social Sciences Research Centre.

526

Goldman, Irving. 1963. The Cubeo: Indians of the Northwest Amazon. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
———. 2004. Cubeo Hehénewa Religious Thought: Metaphysics of a Northwestern Amazonian People.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Gómez López, Augusto Javier, Hugo Armando Sotomayor Tribín, and Ana Cristina Lesmes Patiño.
1998. Amazonía colombiana: Enfermedades y epidemías. Un estudio de bioantropología
histórica. Bogotá: Ministerio de Cultura.
Gongora, Majoi Fávero. 2016. “Ääma Ashichaato: Replicações, transformações, pessoas e cantos entre
os Ye’kwana do Rio Auaris.” PhD Diss., Universidade de São Paulo.
Gordon, Cesar. 2006. Economia selvagem: Ritual e mercadoria entre os índios Xikrin-Mebêngôkre. São
Paulo: UNESP.
Gow, Peter. 1991. Of Mixed Blood: Kinship and History in Peruvian Amazonia. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
———. 2001. An Amazonian Myth and Its History. New York: Oxford university Press.
Graeber, David. 2001. Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coin of Our Dreams.
New York: Palgrave.
———. 2015. “Radical Alterity Is Just Another Way of Saying ‘Reality’: a Reply to Eduardo Viveiros
de Castro.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 5 (2): 1–41.
Graeber, David, and Marshall Sahlins. 2017. On Kings. Chicago: HAU Books.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1977. Selections from Political Writings, 1910-1920. New York: International
Publishers.
Gregory, Chris. 1997. Savage Money: The Anthropology and Politics of Commodity Exchange. London:
Routledge.
———. 2015. Gifts and Commodities. Chicago: HAU books.
Grenand, Pierre, and Françoise Grenand. 2000. “Em busca da aliança impossível: Os Waiãpi do norte e
seus brancos (Guiana Francesa).” In Pacificando o Branco: Cosmologias Ddo contato no NorteAmazônico, edited by Bruce Albert and Alcida Rita Ramos, 145–73. São Paulo: UNESP.

527

Griffiths, Thomas. 1998. “Ethnoeconomics and Native Amazonian Livehood: Culture and Economy
among the Nipode-Uitoto of the Middle Caqueta Basin in Colombia.” PhD Diss., Oxford:
University of Oxford.
———. 2001. “Finding One’s Body: Relationships between Cosmology and Work in North-West
Amazonia.” In Beyond the Visible and the Material: The Amerindianization of Society in the
Work of Peter Rivière, edited by Laura Rival and Neil L. Whitehead, 247–61. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Guss, David. 1989. To Weave and Sing: Art, Symbol and Narrative in the South American Rain Forest.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gutierrez Choquevilca, Andrea-Luz. 2010. “Imaginaire acoustique et apprentissage d’une ontologie
animiste. Le cas des Quechua d’Amazonie péruvienne.” Ateliers d’anthropologie. 34.
Http://journals.openedition.org/ateliers/8553
Gutierrez, Maria Paz. 2020. “The Northwestern Amazon Malocas: Craft Now and Then.” Journal of
Material Culture 25 (1): 3–35.
Guyot, Mireille. 1972. “La maison des Bora et Miraña.” Journal de La Société Des Américanistes 61:
141–76.
———. 1979. “La historia del mar de danta, el Caquetá: Una fase de la evolución cultural En el
noroeste amazónico.” Journal de La Société Des Américanistes 66: 99–123.
Guzmán Gonzalez, Manuel José. 1971. “Caucho y relaciones interetnicas entre los Andoke del
Caquetá.” Undergraduate thesis, Universidad de los Andes.
Hames, Raymond. 2007. “The Ecologically Noble Savage Debate.” Annual Review of Anthropology 36:
177–90.
Hammen, Maria Clara van der. 1992. El manejo del mundo: Naturaleza y sociedad entre los Yucuna de
la Amazonía colombiana. Bogota: Tropenbos Colombia.
Hardenburg, Walter Ernest. 1913. The Putumayo: The Devil’s Paradise. Travels in the Peruvian
Amazon Region and an Account of the Atrocities Committed upon the Indians Therein. London:
T. Fisher Unwin.

528

Harner, Michael. 1984. Jívaro: People of the Sacred Warerfalls. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Heckenberger, Michael. 2004. “The Wars Within: Xinguano Witchcraft and Balance of Power.” In In
Darkness and Secrecy: The Anthropology of Assault Sorcery and Witchcraft in Amazonia, edited
by Neil L. Whitehead and Robin Wright, 179–201. Durham: Duke University Press.
———. 2005. The Ecology of Power: Culture, Place, and Personhood in the Southern Amazon, A.D.
1000-2000. New York: Routledge.
Heckler, S. L. 2004. “Tedium and Creativity: The Valorization of Manioc Cultivation and Piaroa
Women.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 10: 241–59.
Hegel, G. W. F. 2019. The Phenomenology of Spirit. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Helms, Mary. 1993. Craft and the Kingly Ideal: Art, Trade and Power. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Herdt, Gilbert. 1990. “Secret Societies and Secret Collectives.” Oceania 60 (4): 360–81.
High, Casey. 2015. “Ignorant Bodies and the Dangers of Knowledge in Amazonia.” In Regimes of
Ignorance: Anthropological Perspectives on the Production and Reproduction of NonKnowledge, edited by Roy Dilley and Thomas G. Kirsch, 91–114. New York and Oxford:
Berghahn.
Hildebrand, Martin von. 1979. “Cosmologie et mythologie tanimuka (Amazonie colombienne).” PhD
Diss., Paris VII.
———. 1983. “Cosmovisión y el concepto de enfermedad entre los Ufaina.” In Medicina, shamanismo
y botánica, Myriam Jimeno Santoyo and Adolfo Triana Antorveza, 48–63. Bogota: Fundación
Comunidades Colombianas.
Hill, Jonathan D. 1984. “Social Equality and Ritual Hierarchy: The Arawakan Wakuenai of Venezuela.”
American Ethnologist 11 (3): 528–44.
———. 1985. “Agnatic Sibling Relations and Rank in Northern Arawakan Myth and Social Life.” In
The Sibling Relationship in Lowland South America. Working Papers on South American
Indians, edited by Judith Shapiro, 25–32. Bennington: Bennington College.

529

Hirtzel, Vincent. 2007. “Les gardes-parc et les maîtres des animaux. Protection, souveraineté et politique
ontologique.” Cahiers d’anthropologie Sociale 1 (3): 65–80.
Holdridge, Leslie Rensselaer, W. C. Grenke, W.H. Hathway, T. Liang, and J. A. Tosi. 1971. Forest
Environments in Tropical Life Zones, a Pilot Study. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Homan, Joshua. 2017. “Disentangling the Ayahuasca Boom: Local Impacts in Western Peruvian
Amazonia.” In The World Ayahuasca Diaspora: Reinventions and Controversies, edited by
Beatriz Cauiby Labate, Clancy Cavnar, and Alex Gearin, 165–81. London and New York:
Routledge.
Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor Adorno. 2002. Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
De la Hoz Melo, Nelsa Judith. 2005. Baile de Tusi, de la boa al arco iris: Rito, relaciones sociales e
identidad de la etnia Andoke, Medio Rio Caquetá, Amazonía colombiana. Bogotá: Universidad
de Los Andes.
Hugh-Jones, Christine. 1979. From the Milk River: Spatial and Temporal Processes in Northwest
Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hugh-Jones, Stephen. 1979. The Palm and the Pleiades: Initiation and Cosmology in Northwest
Amazonia. Cambridge: University Press.
———. 1988. “The Gun and the Bow: Myths of White Men and Indians.” L’Homme 106/107: 138–55.
———. 1992. “Yesterday’s Luxuries, Tomorrow’s Necessities: Business and Barter in Northwest
Amazonia.” In Barter, Exchange and Value: An Anthropological Approach, edited by Caroline
Humphrey and Stephen Hugh-Jones, 42–74. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1993. “Clear Descent or Ambiguous Houses? A Re-Examination of Tukanoan Social
Organisation.” L’Homme 33: 95–120.
———. 1994. “Shamans, Prophets, Priests, and Pastors.” In Shamanism, History, and the State, edited
by Nicholas Thomas and Caroline Humphrey, 32–75. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
———. 2001. “The Gender of Some Amazonian Gifts: An Experiment with an Experiment.” In Gender
in Amazonia and Melanesia: An Exploration of the Comparative Method, edited by Thomas A.
Gregor and Donald Tuzin, 245–78. Berkeley: University of California Press.

530

———. 2002. “Nomes secretos e riqueza visível: Nominação no noroeste amazônico.” Mana 8 (2): 45–
68.
———. 2010. “Entre l’image et l’écrit. La politique tukano de patrimonialisation en Amazonie.”
Cahiers des Amériques Latines 63–64: 195–227.
———. 2013. “Bride‐service and the Absent Gift.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 19
(2): 356–77.
———. 2014. “Coca, Beer, Cigars and Yagé: Meals and Anti-Meals in an Amerindinian Community.”
In Consuming Habits: Drugs in History and Anthropolgy, edited by Jordan Goodman, Paul E.
Lovejoy, and Andrew Sheratt, 62–80. London: Routledge.
———. 2016. “Lévi-Strauss, Poronominaré and the Cicadas. A Footnote to The Jealous Potter.” Journal
de La Société Des Américanistes 102 (1): 161–64.
———. 2019a. “Good Reasons or Bad Conscience? Or, Why Some Indian Peoples of Amazonia Are
Ambivalent about Eating Meat.” Tipití: Journal of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland
South America 16 (2): 102–19.
———. 2019b. “Patrimony, Publishing, and Politics: Books as Ritual Objects in Northwest Amazonia.”
Tipití: Journal of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 16 (2): 128–50.
———. 2019c. “Thinking through Tubes: Flowing H/Air and Synaesthesia.” Tipití: Journal of the
Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 16 (2): 20–46.
IDEAM. 2010. “Atlas Climatológico de Colombia.” 2010.
http://atlas.ideam.gov.co/visorAtlasClimatologico.html. Accessed November 23, 2023.
Ingold, Tim. 2000. The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill.
London and New York: Routledge.
Jabin, David. 2016. “Le service éternel: Ethnographie d’un esclavage amérindien (Yuqui, Amazonie
bolivienne).” PhD Diss., Université Paris Ouest - Nanterre la Defense.
Jacopin, Pierre-Yves. 2010. “De l’agentivité dans, et de la parole mythique.” Ateliers d’anthropologie
34. https://journals.openedition.org/ateliers/8533

531

Jara, Fabiola. 1995. “Bees and Wasps: Ethno-Entomological Notions and Myths among the Andoke of
the Caqueta River in Colombian Amazon.” Latin American Indian Literatures Journal 11: 148–
65.
———. 1996. “La miel y el aguijón. Taxonomia zoológica y etnobiología como elementos en la
definición de las nociones de genero entre los Andoke (Amazonia colombiana.” Journal de La
Société Des Américanistes 82: 209–58.
Jolkesky, Marcelo Pinho de Valhery. 2016. “Estudo arqueo-ecolinguístico das terras tropicais sulAamericanas.” PhD Diss., Universidade de Brasilia.
Kabiyari, Gustavo, José Kabiyari, Benedicto Kabiyari, and François Correa Rubio. 1989. Relatos
míticos Cabiyari. Bogotá: Servicio Colombiano de Comunicación.
Karadimas, Dimitri. 1999. “L’impossible quête d’un ‘kalos thanatos’ chez les Miraña d’Amazonie
colombienne.” Journal de La Société Des Américanistes 85: 387–98.
———. 2000a. “La parole engendrée : Analyse des conceptions miraña de la prise de coca.” In En
substances. Textes pour Françoise Héritier, edited by Jean-Luc Jamard, Emmanuel Terray and
Margarita Xanthakou, 443–56. Paris: Editions CNRS.
———. 2000b. “Parenté et alliance miraña.” L’Homme 154–155: 599–612.
———. 2001. “Parenté en esclavage. Pratiques matrimoniales et alliances politiques chez les Miraña
d’Amazonie Colombienne.” Droit et Cultures 39: 81–100.
———. 2005a. “Chercher le centre: Stratégie d’orientation spatiale chez les Miraña d’Amazonie
colombienne.” In Les Espaces de l’homme, edited by Alain Berthoz and Roland Recht, 67–91.
Paris: Odile Jacob.
———. 2005b. La raison du corps: Idéologie du corps et représentations de l’environnement chez les
Miraña d’Amazonie colombienne. Paris: Peeters.
———. 2007. “Le don ou le droit à la prédation. Le rituel des esprits des animaux chez les Miraña
(Amazonie colombienne).” In Don et Sciences Sociales: Théories et Pratiques Croisées, edited
by Elena Magnani, 105–22. Dijon: Editions Universitatires de Dijon.
———. 2008. “La métamorphose de Yurupari: Flûtes, trompes et reproduction rituelle dans le nordouest amazonien.” Journal de La Société Des Américanistes 94: 127–69.

532

———. 2013. “Odours and Boundaries: Bora-Miraña Construction of Territoriality (Amazonia).”
Ethnologies 35 (2): 183–201.
Kelly, José Antonio. 2011. State Healthcare and Yanomami Transformations: A Symmetrical
Ethnography. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Kennedy, Dorothy. 2002. “Culture and Politics in the Aboriginal Landscape: Reflections on the
Identification of Culturally Significant Places in Western North America.” In Land and
Territoriality, edited by Michael Saltman, 9–35. Oxford and New York: Berg.
Kohn, Eduardo. 2007. “How Dogs Dream: Amazonian Natures and the Politics of Transspecies
Engagement.” American Ethnologist 34 (1): 3–24.
———. 2013. How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology beyond the Human. Berkeley: University
of California press.
Kracke, Waud H. 1978. Force and Persuasion: Leadership in an Amazonian Society. Chicago:
University of Chicago press.
Lacan, Jacques. 1981. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan. Book XI. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Lagrou, Els. 2017. “Comment on Carlos David Londoño Sulkin’s ‘Moral Sources and the Reproduction
of the Amazonian Package.’” Current Anthropology 58 (4): 490–91.
Landaburu, Jon. 1979. La langue des Andokes (Amazonie colombienne). Paris: Société d’études
linguistiques et anthropologiques de France.
———. 1985. “El tratamiento gramatical del espacio en la lengua Andoque del Amazonas.” Revista de
Antropología 1: 81–100.
———. 1993. “Du changement des noms de certains dieux.” In Mémoire de la tradition, edited by
Aurore Monod Becquelin and Antoinette Molinié, 145–59. Nanterre: Société d’ethnologie.
———. 2007. “La modalisation du savoir en langue Andoke (Amazonie colombienne).” In
L’énonciation médiatisée II: Le traitement épistémologique de l’information: Illustrations
amérindiennes et caucasiennes, edited by Zlatka Guentchéva and Jon Landaburu, 23–47.
Leuven: Peeters.
Landaburu, Jon, and Roberto Pineda Camacho. 1981. “Cuentos del diluvio de fuego.” Maguaré 1: 53–
80.
533

———. 1984. Tradiciones de La Gente del Hacha: Mitología de los índios andoques Del Amazonas.
Yerbabuena: Instituto Caro y Cuervo.
Langdon, Esther Jean Matteson. 1992a. “Introduction: Shamanism and Anthropology.” In Portals of
Power: Shamanism in South America, edited by Esther Jean Matteson Langdon and Gerhard
Baer, 1–21. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
———. 1992b. “Shamanic Power in Siona Religion and Medicine.” In Portals of Power: Shamanism in
South America, edited by Esther Jean Matteson Langdon and Gerhard Baer, 41–61.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Langdon, Esther Jean Matteson, and Gerhard Baer, eds. 1992. Portals of Power: Shamanism in South
America. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Latour, Bruno. 1993. We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
———. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford: University
Press.
Lazar, Sian. 2022. “Anthropology and the Politics of Alterity: A Latin American Dialectic and Its
Relevance for Ontological Anthropologies.” Anthropological Theory 22 (2): 131–53.
Lea, Vanessa. 1992. “Mebengokre (Kayapó) Onomastics: A Facet of Houses as Total Social Facts in
Central Brazil.” Man 27: 129–53.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. 1962. The Savage Mind. London: Weidenfield and Nicolson.
———. 1964. Mythologiques. 1. Le cru et le cuit. Paris: Plon.
———. 1969. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode.
———. 1981. The Naked Man: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, Volume 4. London: Jonathan
Cape.
———. 2009. Mythologiques 2. Du miel aux cendres. Paris: Plon.
Little, Paul. 2001. Amazonia: Territorial Struggles on Perennial Frontiers. Baltimore and London: The
Johns Hopkins University Press.

534

Londoño Sulkin, Carlos David 2000. “The Making of Real People: An Interpretation of a MoralityCentered Theory of Sociality, Livelihood and Selfhood among the Muinane (Colombian
Amazon).” PhD Diss., University of St. Andrews.
———. 2005. “Inhuman Beings: Morality and Perspectivism among Muinane People (Colombian
Amazon).” Ethnos 70 (1): 7–30.
———. 2010. “People of No Substance: Imposture and the Contingency of Morality in the Colombian
Amazon.” Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action, edited by Michael Lambek,
273–91. New York: Fordham University Press.
———. 2012. People of Substance: An Ethnography of Morality in the Colombian Amazon. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
———. 2017. “Moral Sources and the Reproduction of the Amazonian Package.” Current
Anthropology 58 (4): 477–501.
Lorrain, Claire. 2000. “Cosmic Reproduction, Economics and Politics among the Kulina of Southwest
Amazonia.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 6 (2): 293–310.
Lowie, Robert. 1948. “Some Aspects of Political Organization among the American Aborigines.”
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 78 (1–2): 11–24.
Lucas, Maria Luísa. 2018. “Fazer o centro: Notas sobre orientação e transformação espacial entre os
bora na Amazônia colombiana.” Revista Teoria & Sociedade 24 (2): 190–206.
———. 2019. “O oriente e o amanecer: História, parentesco e ritual entre os Bora na Amazônia
Colombiana.” PhD Diss., Museu Nacional, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
———. 2021. “Mais além do desamparo: Orfandade e chefia entre os Bora na Amazônia colombiana.”
Mana 27 (1): 1–33.
Lukes, Steven. 2021. Power: A Radical View. London: Red Globe Press.
De Magalhães Lima, Deborah. 2014. “O homem branco e o boto: O encontro colonial em narrativas de
encantamento e transformação (Médio Rio Solimões, Amazonas).” Teoria e Sociedade, 173–
201.
Magazine, Robert. 2018. “Child-Snatchers and Head-Choppers: A Highland Meso-American Reverse
Anthropology.” In The Culture of Invention in the Americas: Anthropological Experiments with
535

Roy Wagner, edited by Pedro Pitarch and José Antonio Kelly, 107–20. Canon Pyon: Sean
Kingston.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1926. Myth in Primitive Psychology. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner &
Co.
Marcoy, Paul. 1869. Voyage à travers l’Amérique du Sud: De l’Océan Pacifique à l’Océan Atlantique.
Vol. 2. Paris: Hachette et Cie.
Marx, Karl. 1976. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Mason, Peter. 1990. Deconstructing America: Representations of the Other. London: Routledge.
Maués, Raymundo Heraldo. 2006. “O simbolismo e o boto na Amazônia: Religiosidade, religião,
identidade.” Historia Oral 9: 11–28.
Mauss, Marcel. 2002. The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies. London:
Routledge.
McCallum, Cecilia. 1989. “Gender, Personhood and Social Organization among the Cashinahua of
Western Amazonia.” PhD Diss., London School of Economics and Political Science.
———. 1990. “Language, Kinship and Politics in Amazonia.” Man, 412–33.
Meneses, Guilherme Pinho. 2020. “Nos caminhos do nixi pae: Movimentos, transformações e
cosmopolíticas.” PhD Diss., Universidade de São Paulo.
Métraux, Alfred. 1946. Myths of the Toba and Pilagá Indians of the Gran Chaco. Philadelphia:
American Folklore Society.
Ministerio del Interior. 2020. “Resguardos Indígenas a Nivel Nacional 2020.”
https://www.datos.gov.co/dataset/Resguardos-Ind-genas-a-Nivel-Nacional-2020/epzt-64uw.
Accessed November 23, 2023.
Nadasdy, Paul. 1999. “The Politics of Tek: Power and the ‘Integration’ of Knowledge.” Arctic
Anthropology 36 (1/2): 1–18.
———. 2005. “Transcending the Debate over the Ecologically Noble Indian: Indigenous Peoples and
Environmentalism.” Ethnohistory 52 (2): 291–331.

536

———. 2012. “Boundaries among Kin: Sovereignty, the Modern Treaty Process, and the Rise of EthnoTerritorial Nationalism among Yukon First Nations.” Comparative Studies in Society and
History 54 (3): 499–532.
———. 2021. “How Many Worlds Are There? Ontology, Practice, and Indeterminacy.” American
Ethnologist 48 (4): 357–69.
Nahum-Claudel, Chloe. 2018. Vital Diplomacy: The Ritual Everyday on a Dammed River in Amazonia.
New York: Berghahn Books.
Naveh, Danny, and Nurit Bird-David. 2014. “How Persons Become Things: Economic and
Epistemological Changes among Nayaka Hunter-Gatherers.” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute 20 (1): 74–92.
Nelson, Robert. 2003. “Environmental Colonialism: ‘Saving’ Africa from Africans.” The Independent
Review 8: 65–86.
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm. 1968. The Will to Power. New York: Vintage Books.
Norton-Smith, Thomas. 2010. The Dance of Person and Place: One Interpretation of American Indian
Philosophy. New York: State University of New York.
Novellino, Dario. 2004. “Contrasting Landscapes, Conflicting Ontologies: Assessing Environmental
Conservation on Palawan Island (The Philippines).” In Ethnographies of Conservation:
Environmentalism and the Distribution of Privilege, edited by David Anderson and Eeva
Berglund, 171–88. New York: Berghahn Books.
Nugent, Stephen L. 2018. The Rise and Fall of the Amazon Rubber Industry: An Historical
Anthropology. London and New York: Routledge.
Overing (Kaplan), Joanna. 1975. The Piaroa: A People of the Orinoco Basin. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
———. 1989. “The Aesthetics of Production: The Sense of Community among the Cubeo and Piaroa.”
Dialectical Anthropology 14: 159–75.
———. 1996. “Who Is the Mightiest of Them All?: Jaguar and Conquistador in Piaroa Images of
Alterity and Identity.” In Monsters, Tricksters and Sacred Cows: Animal Tales and American
Identities, edited by A. James Arnold, 50–79. Charlottesville and London: University Press of
Virginia.

537

Páramo Bonilla, Carlos Guillermo. 2008. “‘Un monstruo absoluto’: Armando Normand y la sublimidad
del mal.” Maguaré, 22: 43–91.
PNN (Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia). 2018. Plan de Manejo 2018-2022, Parque Nacional
Natural Serranía de Chiribiquete, November 2018,
https://old.parquesnacionales.gov.co/portal/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/plan-de-manejo-pnnchiribiquete-2018-2022.pdf
———. “960 Individuos y Más de 328 Especies de Flora y Fauna Identificadas En El Parque Nacional
Natural Serranía de Chiribiquete.” October 29, 2019.
http://www.parquesnacionales.gov.co/portal/es/960-individuos-y-mas-de-328-especies-de-floray-fauna-identificadas-en-el-parque-nacional-natural-serrania-de-chiribiquete/.
Parry, Jonathan. 1989. “On the Moral Perils of Exchange.” In Money and the Morality of Exchange,
edited by Jonathan Parry and Maurice Bloch, 64–93. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parry, Jonathan, and Maurice Bloch. 1989. “Introduction: Money and the Morality of Exchange.” In
Money and the Morality of Exchange, edited by Jonathan Parry and Maurice Bloch, 1–32.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Passerin d’Entrèves, Alexander. 1967. The Notion of the State: An Introduction to Political Theory.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pasteur, Louis. 1922. Oeuvres de Pasteur. Volume 1. Paris: Masson.
Pineda Camacho, Roberto. 1975. “La Gente del Hacha: Breve historia de la tecnología según una tribu
amazónica.” Revista Colombiana de Antropología 18: 441–78.
———. 1976. El baile de los pescados, o el rito de chontaduro dentro de los indígenas adoques del
Caquetá. Popayán: Universidad del Cauca.
———. 1979. “El sendero del arco iris. Notas sobre el simbolismo de los negocios en una comunidad
amázonica.” Revistsa Colombiana de Antropología 22: 29–58.
———. 1982. Chagras y cacerias de la garza siringuera: El sistema hortícola andoque (Amazonia
colombiana). Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
———. 1985. Historia oral y proceso escalvista en el Caqueta. Bogota: Finarco.

538

———. 1992. “Enfermos de amor: Cómo se negocia la identidad en la modernidad colonial?” Boletin
Cultural y Bibliográfico 29 (30): 77–88.
———. 2000. Holocausto en el Amazonas: Una historia social de la Casa Arana. Bogotá: Planeta.
———. 2005. “Bajo el imperio del antropófago. Las casas caníbales y los sacrificios humanos entre los
Uitotos de la Amazonía colombiana.” In Chamanismo y sacrificio–Perspectivas arqueológicas y
etnológicas en sociedades indígenas de América del Sur, edited by Jean-Pierre Chaumeil,
Roberto Pineda Camacho, and Jean-François Bouchard, 225–36. Bogota: Institut français
d’études andines.
———. 2014. Los huérfanos de la vorágine : Los Andoques y su desafío para superar el llanto del
genocidio cauchero. Bogotá: Academia Colombiana de Historia.
Pineda Camacho, Roberto, and Hector Llanos. 1982. Etnohsitoria del Gran Caquetá" (siglos XVI-XIX).
Bogotá: Fundación de Investigaciones Arqueológicas Nacionales, Banco de la República.
Pollock, Donald. 2004. “Siblings and Sorcerers: The Paradox of Kinship among the Kulina.” In In
Darkness and Secrecy: The Anthropology of Assault Sorcery and Witchcraft in Amazonia, edited
by Neil L. Whitehead and Robin Wright, 202–14. Durham: Duke University Press.
Preuss, Konrad Teodor. 1994. Religión y mitología de los Uitotos: Recopilación de textos y
observaciones efectuadas en una tribu indígena de Colombia, Suramérica. Santafé de Bogotá:
Editorial Universidad Nacional.
Redford, Kent. 1991. “The Ecologically Noble Savage.” Cultural Survival Quarterly 15 (1): 46.
Reichel, Elizabeth. 1989. “La danta y el delfín: Manejo ambiental e intercambio entre dueños de maloca
y chamanes. El caso Yukuna-Matapi (Amazonas).” Revista de Antropología 5 (1–2).
Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo. 1971. Amazonian Cosmos: The Sexual and Religious Symbolism of the
Tukano Indians. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1975. The Shaman and the Jaguar: A Study of Narcotic Drugs among the Indians of Colombia.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
———. 1976. “Cosmology as Ecological Analysis: A View from the Rain Forest.” Man 11 (3): 307–18.
Rivière, Peter. 1983. “Aspects of Carib Political Economy.” Antropológica, 59 62: 349–58.

539

———. 1987. “Of Women, Men and Manioc.” In Natives and Neighbors in South America, edited by
Frank Salomon and Harold Skar, Etnologiska Studier:178–201. Göteborg: Göteborgs
Etnografiska Museum.
Robbins, Joel, and Alan Rumsey. 2008. “Introduction: Cultural and Linguistic Anthropology and the
Opacity of Other Minds.” Anthropological Quarterly 81 (2): 407–20.
Robuchon, Eugène. 2010. En el Putumayo y sus afluentes. Calí: Universidad del Cauca.
Rodríguez Fernández, Carlos Alberto. 1991. Bagres, malleros y cuerderos en el Bajo Río Caqueta
(Amazonia colombiana). Bogota: Tropenbos Colombia.
Romero Mendoza, Mauricio. 2016. “Pesquisando en tierras indígenas: Una aproximación a las
encrucijadas de la minería informal en la concepción y acción en el mundo - medio río Caquetá,
Amazonía colombiana.” M.A. Thesis, Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en
Antropología Social.
Rosas Riaño, Diana. 2021. “ Ir fuera: Menstruación, yuruparí y movilidad. Trayectorias espaciales y
experiencias corporales de mujeres indígenas del Mirití-Paraná.” PhD Diss., Universidad
Nacional de Colombia.
Rossi Idárraga, María. 2020a. “ Íntimo y público: mujeres indígenas como sujetos y como asuntos
políticos, Vaupés, Colombia.” In Mujeres indígenas haciendo, investigando y reescribiendo lo
político en América Latina, edited by Astrid Ulloa, 63–103. Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de
Colombia.
———. 2020b. “ Reflexões sobre gênero e etnicidade nos cenários e repertórios de participação política
no Vaupés colombiano.” Horizontes Antropológicos 26 (58): 319–47.
Rubenstein, Steven Lee. 2004. “Steps to a Political Ecology of Amazonia.” Tipití: Journal of the Society
for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 2 (2): 2.
———. 2004. “Fieldwork and the Erotic Economy on the Colonial Frontier.” Signs: Journal of Women
and Culture in Society 29 (4): 1041–71.
———. 2007. “Circulation, Accumulation, and the Power of Shuar Shrunken Heads.” Cultural
Anthropology 22 (3): 357–99.

540

———. 2012. “On the Importance of Visions among the Amazonian Shuar.” Current Anthropology 53
(1): 39–79.
Sahlins, Marshall. 1994. “Cosmologies of Capitalism: The Trans-Pacific Sector of’The World System’.”
In Culture/Power/History, edited by Nicholas B. Dirks, Geoff Eley, and Sherry B. Ortner, 412–
55. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———. 2000. “On the Anthropology of Modernity, or, Some Triumphs of Culture over Despondency
Theory.” Culture and Sustainable Development in the Pacific, 44–61.
Sallnow, Michael J. 1981. “Communitas Reconsidered: The Sociology of Andean Pilgrimage.” Man,
163–82.
Santos Granero, Fernando. 1986. “Power, Ideology and the Ritual of Production in Lowland South
America.” Man, 657–79.
———. 1993. “From Prisoner of the Group to Darling of the Gods: An Approach to the Issue of Power
in Lowland South America.” L’Homme 33 (126–128): 213–30.
———. 1998. “Writing History into the Landscape: Space, Myth, and Ritual in Contemporary
Amazonia.” American Ethnologist 25: 128–48.
———. 2009a. “Introduction.” In The Occult Life of Things: Native Amazonian Theories of Materiality
and Personhood, edited by Fernando Santos Granero, 1–29. Tucson, Arizona: University of
Arizona Press.
———. 2009b. Vital Enemies: Slavery, Predation, and the Amerindian Political Economy of Life.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
Seeger, Anthony, Roberto da Matta, and Eduardo Viveiros De Castro. 1979. “A construção da pessoa
nas sociedades indígenas brasileiras.” Boletím Do Museo Nacional 32: 1–51.
Severi, Carlo. 1988. “L’Étranger, l’envers de soi et l'échec du symbolisme: Deux représentations du
Blanc dans la tradition chamanique cuna.” L’Homme 106–107: 174–83.
Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Edited by Kurt H. Wolff. Glencoe: The Free
Press.

541

Slaghenauffi, Doriane. 2020. “Le chamanisme shipibo à l’épreuve de la modernité: Guérir les maladies
des Occidentaux par une forme de socialisation par les plantes.” Anthropologie et Sociétés 44
(3): 129–48.
Slater, Candace. 1994. Dance of the Dolphin: Transformation and Disenchantment in the Amazonian
Imagination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sodikoff, Genese Marie. 2012. Forest and Labor in Madagascar. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Von Spix, Johann Baptist, and Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius. 1981. Viagem pelo Brasil: 18171820. Volume 3. Belo Horizonte: Editora Itatiaia Limitada, Editora da Universidade de São
Paulo.
Sprenger, Guido. 2015. “Dimensions of Animism in Southeast Asia.” In Animism in Southeast Asia,
edited by Kaj Århem and Guido Sprenger, 31–51. London and New York: Routledge.
Stadler, Nurit. 2020. Voices of the Ritual: Devotion to Female Saints and Shrines in the Holy Land. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Stasch, Rupert. 2008. “Knowing Minds Is a Matter of Authority: Political Dimensions of Opacity
Statements in Korowai Moral Psychology.” Anthropological Quarterly 81 (2): 443–53.
STC-063/2019. 2019. Corte Constitucional de Colombia.
https://www.corteconstitucional.gov.co/relatoria/2019/t-063-19.htm. Accessed 16 March 2024.
Stolze Lima, Tânia. 1996. “O dois e seu múltiplo: Reflexões Sobre o perspectivismo em uma
cosmologia tupi.” Mana 2: 21–47.
Strathern, Marilyn. 1988. The Gender of the Gift: Problems With Women and Problems With Society in
Melanesia. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
———. 1991. “One Man and Many Men.” In Big Men and Great Men: Personifications of Power in
Melanesia, edited by Maurice Godelier and Marilyn Strathern, 197–214. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Surrallés, Alexandre. 2003. “Face to Face: Meaning, Feeling and Perception in Amazonian Welcoming
Ceremonies.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 9 (4): 775–91.

542

Taussig, Michael. 1980. The Devil and Commodity Fetishism in South America. Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press.
———. 1986. Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wild Man: A Study in Terror and Healing. Chicago
and London: University of Chicago Press.
Taylor, Anne Christine. 1983. “The Marriage Alliance and Its Structural Variations in Jivaroan
Societies.” Social Science Information 22 (3): 331–53.
———. 1993a. “Des fantômes stupéfiants: Langage et croyance dans la pensée achuar.” L’homme, 429–
47.
———. 1993b. “Remembering to Forget: Identity, Mourning and Memory Among the Jivaro.” Man 28
(4): 653–78.
Tessmann, Günter. 1999. Los indígenas del Perú nororiental: Investigaciones fundamentales para un
estudio sistemático de la cultura. Quito: Abya-Yala.
Thom, Brian. 2009. “The Paradox of Boundaries in Coast Salish Territories.” Cultural Geographies 16
(2): 179–205.
———. 2014. “Reframing Indigenous Territories: Private Property, Human Rights and Overlapping
Claims.” American Indian Culture and Research Journal 38 (4): 3–28.
Tilkin Gallois, Dominique. 1987. “O Discurso waiapi sobre o ouro: Um profetismo moderno.” Revista
de Antropologia 30–32: 457–67.
———. 1990. “L’or et la boue: Cosmologie et orpaillage waiãpi.” Ethnies 11 (12): 50–55.
Tola, Florencia. 2019. “Sorcery, Revenge, and Anti-Revenge: Relational Excess and Individuation in the
Gran Chaco.” Social Analysis 63 (2): 81–101.
Tselouiko, Stéphanie. 2015. “Da mata ao mapa: Os Xikrin no encontro dos caminhos.” Paper presented
at the V° Reunião Equatorial de Antropologia, Maceió.
Turner, Terence. 1979. “The Gê and Bororo Societies as Dialectical Systems: A General Model.” In
Dialectical Societies, edited by David Maybury-Lewis, 147–78. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

543

———. 2003. “The Beautiful and the Common: Inequalities of Value and Revolving Hierarchy among
the Kayapó.” Tipití: Journal of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 1
(1): 11–26.
Turner, Victor. 1967. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Urbina Rangel, Fernando. 1997. “Un baile para hacer la paz: Por qué los Uitotos hacen baile de
Karijona?” In Religión y Etnicidad En América Latina 2 :79–127.
———. 2010. Las palabras de origen: Breve compendio de la mitología de los Uitotos. Bogotá:
Ministerio de Cultura.
Useche Losada, Mariano. 1994. La Colonia penal de Araracuara: Socioeconomía y recursos naturales
(1938-1971). Bogotá: Tropenbos Colombia.
Valeri, Valerio. 1994. “Buying Women but Not Selling Them: Gift and Commodity Exchange in
Huaulu Alliance.” Man, 1–26.
Van Velthem, Lúcia Hussak. 2000. “‘Feito por inimigos’: Os brancos e seus bens nas representações
wayana do contato.” In Pacificando o Branco: Cosmologias do contato no norte Amazônico,
edited by Bruce Albert and Rita Alcida Ramos, 61–78. São Paulo: Editora UNESP/Imprensa
Oficial/IRD.
Vidal, Silvia M. 1999. “Amerindian Groups of Northwest Amazonia: Their Regional System of
Political-Religious Hierarchies.” Anthropos 94: 515–28.
De Vienne, Emmanuel, and Olivier Allard. 2005. “ Pour une poignée de dollars?: Transmission et
patrimonialisation de la culture chez les Trumai du Brésil central.” Cahiers Des Amériques
Latines 48–49: 127–45.
Vilaça, Aparecida. 2002. “Making Kin out of Others in Amazonia.” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute 8 (2): 347–65.
———. 2007. “Cultural Change as Body Metamorphosis.” In Time and Memory in Indigenous
Amazonia: Anthropological Perspectives, edited by Carlos Fausto and Michael Heckenberger,
169–93. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

544

———. 2009. “Conversion, Predation, and Perspective.” In Native Christians: Modes and Effects of
Christianity among Indigenous Peoples of the Americas, edited by Aparecida Vilaça and Robin
Wright, 147–66. Farnham and Burlington: Ashgate.
———. 2016. Praying and Preying: Christianity in Indigenous Amazonia. Oakland: University of
California press.
Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo. 1993a. “Alguns aspectos da afinidade no dravidianato amazônico.” In
Amazônia: Etnologia e história indígena, edited by Eduardo Viveiros de Castro and Manuela
Carneiro da Cunha, 149–210. Sao Paulo: USP-NHII/Fapesp.
———. 1996. “Images of Nature and Society in Amazonian Ethnology.” Annual Review of
Anthropology 25 (1): 179–200.
———. 1998. “Cosmological Deixis and Amerindian Perspectivism.” The Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute 4 (3): 469–88.
———. “GUT Feelings about Amazonia: Potential Affinity and the Construction of Sociality.” In
Beyond the Visible and the Material: The Amerindianization of Society in the Work of Peter
Riviere, edited by Laura Rival and Neil L. Whitehead, 21–43. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2004. “Perspectival Anthropology and the Method of Controlled Equivocation.” Tipiti: Journal
of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 2 (1): 3–22.
———. 2014. Cannibal Metaphysics. Minneapolis: Univocal.
Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo, and Carlos Fausto. 1993. “La puissance et l’acte: La parenté dans les
basses terres d’Amérique du Sud.” L’Homme 126/128: 141–70.
Walker, Harry. 2010. “Soulful Voices: Birds, Language and Prophecy in Amazonia.” Tipití: Journal of
the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America 8 (1): 1–21.
———. 2013. Under a Watchful Eye: Self, Power, and Intimacy in Amazonia. Berkeley: University of
California press.
Weber, Max. 1968. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. New York: Bedminster
Press.
Whiffen, Thomas. 1915. The North-West Amazons: Notes of Some Months Spent Among Cannibal
Tribes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
545

Whyte, Kyle. 2017. “Indigenous Climate Change Studies: Indigenizing Futures, Decolonizing the
Anthropocene.” English Language Notes 55 (1): 153–62.
Willerslev, Rane. 2007. Soul Hunters: Hunting, Animism, and Personhood among the Siberian
Yukaghirs. Berkeley: University of California Press.
World Bank. 2016. “World Bank Environmental and Social Framework.” 2016.
https://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/837721522762050108/Environmental-and-SocialFramework.pdf#page=29&zoom=80. Accessed November 23, 2023.

546

Appendices

547

548

Appendix 1. Mythology
M1. Coca of the Animals (Nestor and Fisi, 20/10/18)173
Lady Sun (Ḭɒ̰pakamikn), the daughter of Shadow Egg (Ká’hoi hádi), planted an earthworm that had
sucked blood from her sister’s leg while she was planting peanuts, thus creating the first coca.174 She
took charge of it, and the animals, who were the men of that time, came to her place to consume coca.
She commanded them, teaching them how to prepare coca and instructing them on what to do: picking
the leaves correctly, toasting them, sifting the coca powder... She tested them to see who would learn her
teachings, such as not cutting off the buds while picking the leaves and weeding around the plants. She
sent people to find taafi, yarumo leaves for ashes [to mix with the toasted leaves’ powder]. The first
worker encountered a man in the forest. “Where are you going?” the man asked him. “I am looking for
yarumo,” the worker replied. “Well, so go look for it!” said the man, who was the yarumo tree himself,
sending him away. The worker returned to Lady Sun, saying, “I couldn’t find any.” “Good, so you go
now,” she said to another, but the same thing happened to him, and so on, until she sent Egret (Yo’fí).
Egret said, “I for one will find it!” He left, and when he encountered a man who asked him, “Where are
you going?”, Egret immediately replied: “I came looking for you!” Embracing him, he carried him back
home under his armpit [similar to how men carry yarumo leaves today]. That is why egrets have a small
plumage under their wings—it is the yarumo that Egret once held there. When he returned, Lady Sun
said: “You indeed paid attention [to what I have taught you]! This one is learning alright!” When it was
time to sift the coca powder, she ordered different people to do it. Parrot sifted too hard and ended up
covered with powder, which is why this parrot is green today. She ordered Owl to sift, but he kept
touching his face and hair, and so became wrinkled and grey-haired. To this day, whenever someone
touches his face or hair while sifting or consuming coca, the touched area becomes wrinkled, and the
touched hair turns grey. Only Egret remained white and clean without powder on him of all the sifters
because he sat peacefully. That is why whatever one does the first time one consumes coca, sticks with
them. When it was time to finish sifting, most animals had only a small amount of coca powder, except
for Egret, whose calabash vessel was full. The sifters served coca to each other. Almost everyone
immediately swallowed the powder they were served, but Egret kept his dry inside his beak to add it
later to his calabash vessel, adding it to the coca he was sifting. Tapir consumed some coca, laid down
Nestor was the main narrator, with Fisi correcting and commenting on his version.
In other versions, where she does not create the coca out of an earthworm, she is called Mánóḛḭkamikn—Lady Protector,
which also indicates her filiation with Mánóḛḭdɨ (Protector) who appears in M2 (see Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 162).
173
174

549

and started farting. He remained in that state the next day and ever since. Those who consumed coca,
fell asleep, and remained asleep the next day, became nocturnal animals, while those who woke up early
after consuming coca remained that way, becoming the animals that are already awake at 5 am. Bodido
[Momotus momota?], who was once very beautiful, consumed coca, returned home, slept with his wife,
and his beautiful colors faded away at once. He became grey and old, and remained grey to this day.
And so, a young man who consumes coca and sleeps with a woman immediately turns old. [The story
provides other examples of animals who consumed coca and remained ever since with the same
appearances or behavior they exhibited at that first formative coca consumption]. That people will
remain as they behaved when they first consumed coca—that was the curse that Lady Sun cast on
humanity. The people became upset, saying: “How can a woman control us like that?” Parrot, realizing
that Egret was about to win Lady Sun’s contest, took a bá’si [a red, guayaba-like unidentified fruit] and
smeared a red spot on her seat. When the spot was brought to her attention, she felt ashamed, thinking
that she was menstruating. She went to her hammock in the rear of the maloca and relinquished her
place to Parrot. Upon realizing that she had been tricked, she cast a curse on us men: “Well, now that
you have done this to me, the coca will stay for you. But we’ll see if you can handle it. If you cannot
control yourselves, maintain the necessary diet, abstain from anger, laziness, and thought about women,
you will end up even worse than as you are today.” But if everything had continued as it was, she would
have simply passed the control over coca to one of them—to Egret—making it much easier for us today
to manage coca.
M2. Coca of the Orphans175
He was called Protector (Mánóḛḭdɨ); he ruled well, and he was good. The people liked going to his
place. He used to organize great assemblies with food for the people in the center. He is Egret of the
Center (Dʉiyo’fí); he is also called Source of Abundance (Tó̰’ḛ ́ ḭdɨ). He is the one who felled the
Speaking Tree [M4]. His wife was named Yellow Leaf (Dópukn), or else Lady Manioc for Manicuera
(Pa̰ḛ ́ pakn). She became angry with him for not doing anything; he used to pass the time seated, thinking.
Once, when he asked her for casabe to eat, she reproached him, so he said: “I am not going to eat
anymore. I need to think from what else my sons will live off after I disappear from this place.” And he
left; he went under the earth. The sons reproached their mother for his absence. “You reproached our
father for your casabe, and now no one is going to eat it! You will eat it by yourself!” Then, for that
175

Source: Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 73–74.

550

reason, she also disappeared, becoming manioc for manicuera (pa̰ḛ́pa). After her disappearance they
became orphans, alone at home. The younger brother sustained himself by licking a pot in which the
manicuera (kó’ko) had been prepared. The elder brother did not feel hunger. He remained seated,
thinking: “What will we do now that we have neither mother nor father? How will we live? Why did our
parents abandon us?” While he was thinking that, underneath them, underneath the earth, the one who
had been buried, the father, made a sound: tan! And then he did it again. The following night he made a
louder sound: hum! The younger brother heard it. He went and sat down next to his elder brother. The
elder brother asked him: “What was that sound?” “You should now! As my elder, you should know!”
The following night, it was heard even louder. The elder brother said: “This is what I am talking about.
What is it?” “You should know, you who are elder than I.” “But what can it be?”. “This is our father
coming,” said the younger brother. The following night, it already sounded closer to the house. The
elder said: “This is what I have been talking about. What is it?” “I don’t know, go and have a look. It
makes a sound over there, under the peach palm.” The elder brother then went to search. The younger
remained seated in the house, at the place where yarumo leaves are burnt for coca preparation. They saw
a leaf budding like a needle, like a thorn. The elder brother said: “This is the thing that makes a sound.
But what is it?” “What can it be! This is called hí’pı̋ e (coca)”, the younger brother named it and said:
“This is coca. Do not touch it!” The elder asked: “And what are we going to do?” “What do you mean,
‘what are we going to do?’” It is going to explain what we are going to do. Our father turned into that to
explain to us. He is going to teach us. He will tell us what we should do. Whoever wants to know in the
future, must do just as we do.” The younger brother sent the elder brother to where the coca was. The
younger brother asked the father, and the father said: “Son! Do it like this. Behave like that. I have
disappeared in order to teach you.” He showed them where to make the mambeadero. The father
continued, saying: “I am going to live above. Listen to me and you will see that you are learning.” The
younger brother listened, and the father made the sound: taa kan huuuuu [a thunder]. The other brother
asked: “What is it?” “It’s our father. It is Sḭ́ di, it is Carnivorous Thunder (Sḭ́ di Dú’di).” “And what does
he say?” “He says that this land will be flooded. He says that the water of fire is coming from the east
and will burn the entire earth. This is what Sḭ́ di is telling us […].”

551

M3. Origin of the Maloca and Cultivars (Fisi, 19/7/19)
Egret of the River Source came down from the river source to the center to live with the youngest daughter
of Shadow Egg (Ká’hoihádi).176 Shadow Egg did not have a proper maloca, he lived under a pile of leaves
and thorns.177 His daughter had had many previous suitors, but the father used to confuse them (yoóka
iboñe nyatii, literally: “he made them useless”), hiding the trees so that they could not perceive them and
build a maloca.178 Egret of the River Source thought: “I am capable of doing it!.” He arrived one afternoon
at Shadow Egg’s house. “Have you arrived?” asked Shadow Egg. “I have arrived,” replied Egret of the
River Source. “Good,” said the father-in-law, “here is my hammock, take a rest there; it’s right next to my
daughter’s, look at her! But eat first!” He ordered his daughter to serve him food so he could confuse him,
as he had done to the previous suitors, but Egret of the River Source refused to eat or drink, nor did he
sleep. He remained seated silently, looking all around him. He went for a walk around the house. When
he returned, the father-in-law asked him, “Son-in-law, where have you gone?” “No, I just went for a walk,”
replied Egret of the River Source. “What are you thinking of?” asked the father-in-law. “No, just thinking
that I want to build myself a shack,” replied Egret of the River Source. “But I couldn’t find anything here;
there are no trees around.” When he passed by the daughter’s hammock, she told him: “My father hid all
the trees; he has them hidden on the other side of the stream. Go there, and the trees will talk to you as if
they were humans, but you must say: ‘It is you I am coming for!’” She also told him to catch a tinamou
(Crypturellus undulatus), smoke it on top of some vegetal salt, and say a certain spell to be able to find
the pui palms (Lepidocaryum tenue) required for the rooftop. Egret of the River Source did as she told
him, found anacondas that he turned into posts and beams and found the pui for the roof. He erected the
posts and tied the beams, then climbed to the top beam and spread the pui leaves, that immediately became
the thatched four main sides of the maloca. Shadow Egg then arrived, and Egret of the River Source told
him: “Why did you come before I am finished? It’s your fault I haven’t finished the roof, now help me to
thatch the remaining four corners.” Before Shadow Egg wove the remaining pui, Egret of the River Source
invited him to consume the coca he had brought with him from the river source and lick the ambíl that he
had brought. If Shadow Egg did not intrude upon Egret of the River Source, today we would also be able
to make the roof that way, instead of working so laboriously in thatching it. Next, Egret of the River

Cf. Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 165–176, where, among other differences, the hero is Egret of the River Source’s son.
Ká’hoihádɨ is also the name of a bird that builds its nest on the ground in that way.
178
In some versions he also ate them. Eating the daughter’s suitor’s is characteristic of Sun (see M6 below). Sun and Shadow
Egg are sometimes confused, as we can note from Shadow Egg’s daughter, Lady Sun, in M1 (cf. Fisi’s comment cited in
Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 179 n.24 that Sun is Shadow Egg’s worker). See discussion in Chapter 1.
176
177

552

Source made the coca mortar, the mambeadero, the macana club. Then he invited his father-in-law to
consume coca and lick ambíl with him and told him that he was going. “Stay here with your wife; she
wants to live with you,” said Shadow Egg. “No,” said Egret of the River Source, “I am going to the house
of my father and my mother, and she should stay with her father and her mother.” He gave Shadow Egg
a torch and told him: “when you hear a thunder from the river source, use it to burn my garden that I made
down the path, where you see a coco leaf.” And he went upriver. When Shadow Egg heard the thunder,
he went to where his son-in-law had told him to go, but could not see any garden; it seemed to him like a
usual forest plot. He lit it with the torch, and everything burned at once, becoming a vast garden. The
smoke that rose to the sky fell back on the earth as rain. With it, all the fruits and cultivars that “our
mother” (katí), whose name is Lady Beetle of Life (Pḭɵfikn), Egret of the River Source’s mother,179 had
taken with her to the sky when the flood had begun, in the past, came down to the garden and became
planted there. These were all the classes of proper fruits and cultivars, for humans, that we eat today—
pineapple, bitter manioc, sweet manioc, everything. Previously, there had only been wild fruits for
animals. By naming each one of them, Egret of the River Source made us these fruits so we can live like
human beings. Egret of the River Source returned to Shadow Egg, who was surprised that the garden was
full of planted cultivars, and told him, his wife, his son, and his daughter how to collect and prepare coca,
pineapple, tobacco, and manioc for manicuera, respectively. Egret of the River Source’s mother descended
as well and prepared caguana and manicuera beverages. When these were ready, she gave them to her
daughter-in-law, who drank the caguana first and the manicuera second, and Egret of the River Source
did the same, to have first a boy and then a girl. When the daughter-in-law peeled the manioc for
manicuera—that species was Egret of the River Source’s grandmother, who had transformed into the
plant—the tuber made a sound: “Po!”. That sound augured that her son will be a captain, po’soɵ. Egret of
the River Source invited his father-in-law to consume coca from the freshly harvested coca and invited
him and his mother-in-law to lick from the freshly harvested tobacco. Egret of the River Source then
organized a dance, to protect the maloca and guarantee there would be plenty of crops in the future. After
the first song, when Egret of the River Source sat down on his seat (kupa) at the mambeadero, his name
changed to Egret of the Center. He then said:180 “I am Egret of the Center. We are going to consume coca,
we are going to lick tobacco. Yes. This is my name. I am from the Center of the Earth. Come. Here I am

In myths that are more identified with the Eagle Clan, she is referred to as Nénéfi’s mother (Landaburu and Pineda 1984,
72)—see Chapters 1 and 2 for the convergence of the yo’fí figures with earlier clan heroes.
180
The following citation is taken from Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 174.
179

553

going to teach you what will happen from now on. All the living beings of the Earth must learn from me.
I am seated here, so you could say: I am going to learn from the man of the center of the earth.”
M5. Origin of Trade with Whites (Fisi 15/12/2018)
Egret of the Center’s daughter, Lady Counting (Otiaikn),181 became pregnant without ever having been
with a man. When she gave birth, a sound was heard. “Sister, what did you have?” Asked the brother.
“A dog (ḭño̰, the same word for “jaguar”) to serve as your companion (ɵ́ɵhɵ),” answered the sister. He
then heard another sound. “Sister, what did you have?”— “Axe-Liana (pɵtano̰, i.e., leash) to tie the dog,
so that it would not bite people.”182 Then, another sound. “Sister, what did you have?”—“[Metal] axe
(pɵɵ), a tool (bɨi’á) for you to work with.” [This sequence follows with the machete, knife, metal pot,
plate, cloth, needle, hook, and perfume]. Finally, she emitted some blood that coagulated on the ground
[the placenta], and she put it on the rooftop beam. People started talking: “Egret of the Center’s daughter
gave birth to the axe; I don’t know what an axe is, let’s go have a look!”183 Trader Egret of the River
Mouth (Okɒ́yo’fí Dohaɵ́hɵ) also came.184 He told the brother that he desired his sister and took her and
most of the goods that she had engendered to the river mouth; a smaller part of the goods remained at
the maloca. The axes that Egret of the River Mouth took were of metal, whereas those that remained at
the center, in Axe Hill (Pɵɵ Tuɒ́i) were of stone. The blood that the sister hid on the rooftop became the
[unidentified] small red jaguar bɵ’ɵdeisu, that followed his mother to the river mouth, where it still
terrorizes people. Next, Burner Egret of the River Source (Obaiyo’fí Duiɵ́hɵ) also arrived in search for
the daughter. When he was told that she had already gone with Trader Egret of the River Mouth, he got
mad of his horse and beat him, accusing him of losing her because the latter did not run fast enough.
After he left, the brother told his father: “I am going to my sister’s house to look for merchandise
(dohai).” He took his coca and tobacco paste and left. “Brother-in-law, what have you come for?” asked
him Trader Egret of the River Mouth.—“I have come looking for the axe.”—“well, here it is. What else
do you want?”—“I am looking for a needle, to sew my cloth for coca filtering; I am looking for a thread
Oti means both “count” and “give a name.” My interlocutors insist that the heroine’s name draws on the former meaning,
as she counted the different goods to which she gave birth. However, since she also named them, we may assume that it
draws on the latter meaning as well.
182
In Raquel’s version, the dog preys on Egret of the Center’s people before the creation of the leash, which ultimately puts
an end to it.
183
The axe is metonymic for all the goods engendered by Egret of the Center’s daughter.
184
On another occasion, Fisi insisted that that hero’s name was Pɵɵyo’fí, Axe Egret, who stands for Whites and lives further
downriver from Egret of the River Mouth, who resides in Ma̰ditapɵnõ (“Trunk of Panopsis suaveolens,” which is Mount
Yupatí near the Apaporis River before it flows into the Caquetá) and symbolizes indigenous peoples acting as intermediates
between the Andoque and White people.
181

554

for sewing; I am looking for a machete to clear plants; I am looking for a plate, for my ambíl,” and the
brother thus listed the things engendered by his sister and received them from his brother-in-law. Trader
Egret of the River Mouth of the River Mouth also offered him perfume and red cloth, but the brother
refused them, as they stand for epidemics and anger, respectively. Upon receiving everything he
returned to the center. “I have brought these,” he told his father. “These are the best ones (fɨñéi); these
are that which we were missing (kahɵ́ɵi; also meaning: ‘our necessities’)”. “This is good,” his father
replied, “with this we are going to work.” After him came Trader Egret of the River Mouth. “I have
come to collect my value [of the things that I have given you; páhai, “value”],” he told Egret of the
Center. He brought with him axe-water, axe-manicuera (poɵdíe, pɵɵkó’koa; i.e., sugar cane liquor), and
cigarettes. Egret of the Center presented his tobacco paste, saying, “It is tobacco, just like yours [your
cigarettes].” He also gave Egret of the River Mouth coca powder and manicuera: “This is mine.” They
shared their substances with each other. Egret of the Center’s word moved forward (yahuha hɵɵ́i) over
that of Trader Egret of the River Mouth, because the former had three substances, and the latter—only
two. “Good,” said Trader Egret of the River Mouth, “you have paid me (ɵpáhai, literally: “you have
realized my value”). Egret of the Center has made the offering (ɵyaɵtaséai) and paid him (oyapáhai).
Trader Egret of the River Mouth returned to his home and then came back to the center, bringing a harpy
eagle with him. He pulled out rubber (tekámn) from the eagle’s nostrils and stretched it. “With this you
need to pay (ɵpáhai) me,” he said. Egret of the Center thought about how he could obtain that material,
when his younger son said: “I saw something similar in the manioc garden, which also stretches like
that.” He took them to the garden, broke a manioc stick and showed them the sap. “This is rubber,”
Egret of the Center named this material. “This is how we are going to work from now on,” said Trader
Egret of the River Mouth, “this is how you are going to pay (ɵpáhai) me”. This is how the exchange
with the Whites started.
M6. Origin of the Swidden185
The first person to have had a garden was Sun (Ḭɒ̰). However, since he did not possess a metal axe, he
used fire and a stone axe to fell trees, leaving many thick trees standing in his garden. Sun would
command his daughter’s numerous suitors to cut down those trees using fire. As the suitors toiled with
their stone axes, the falling fruits would crush them, and Sun would devour them. Egret of the River
Mouth (Okɒ́yo’fí), also named Axe Egret (Pɵɵyo’fí) and Work Egret (Báőiyo’fí), also sought to marry
185

Source: Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 176–79.

555

Sun’s daughter. He came with his metal axe that operated by itself, but when Sun looked at the axe, it
ceased functioning. Hence, nowadays, we must attach a handle to the axe and hold it in our hands. After
Egret of the River Mouth built the house and thatched the roof, he was instructed by Sun to cut down
one of the remaining trees in the garden. Since Egret of the River Mouth did not sleep with Sun’s
daughter, she revealed her father’s trick to him and advised him to protect himself while working with a
light covering. Egret of the River Mouth followed her advice, and his life was spared when the fruits fell
on the covering and did not land on him. However, the trunk remained upright. Egret of the River Mouth
then commanded Marmoset (Cebuella pygmaea; ḭɒ̰dǵñḛ, “protection from Sun”) to climb and sever the
vine connecting the trunk to different points at the river mouth, river source, and other directions. He
then sent the horseflies to bite whoever held the vine at these points, forcing them to release it. The tree
then fell. There was a termite nest on the tree, and when Egret of the River Mouth went to bathe after his
success, Sun stumbled upon the nest and consumed it, mistakenly believing it to be his deceased son-inlaw. Upon returning to the tree, Egret of the River Mouth caught Sun in the act, “What are you doing?”
“Nothing,” replied Sun, “just looking around.”
M7. The Orphan Pipe Blower (José* 24/8/18)186
After their father Pa̰tonʉpa’s died, his five orphaned children lived with their mother, who kept
fertilizing a peach palm, in the hollow stump of which her lover (saámḭ), Earthworm, resided. The
children would hunt in the forest, where they befriended an iguana that became their pet. Upon their
afternoon return, they handed the game to their mother, who cooked it and prepared casabe. Despite
eating heartily, they remained thin. Puzzled by this, they asked Iguana to stay home and observe their
mother, which he did. He witnessed the mother reclining in her hammock, her earthworm lover
ascending it to copulate with her, and a palm petiole on the ground beneath the hammock collecting the
secreted fluids. After their lovemaking, the mother mixed these fluids with the dough for most of the
casabe cakes she baked but kept one cake untainted. She stacked the soiled casabe atop the clean one
and awaited her children’s return. They handed her the game and went to bathe, where Iguana recounted
what he had seen. At dinner, they told her, “Today, Pa̰tonʉpa’s sons want to eat from below!” and chose
the bottom cake, leaving the tainted ones for her. After eating they told her, “Tomorrow we will burn the
peach palm in the patio!” The mother protested, “Don’t burn it; this palm reminds me of your father.”
They defied her and burned the tree and the lover within. The mother took her pot of pí’na̰ [rotten
186

This myth is also found in Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 133–36.

556

manioc leaves] broth into the forest, spilling it around, thereby creating tamarin monkeys (sima̰de;
Saguinus fuscicollis). She scolded them, “You damage your father’s tree instead of hunting these
tamarins!” They pursued the tamarins with blowpipes (uipeɨkń), but each hit caused the tamarins to
multiply and elude them further into the forest, until they heard the yopakoɵ tinamou sing in the
afternoon, “For Pa̰tonʉpa’s sons the world has turned upside down” (Pa̰tonʉpa ɵɵ́tɵ síɵ́hɵ ma páa bɵ
nñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí yo̰pá’anni, literally: “For Pa̰tonʉpa’s sons, the world is in the new/unknown”).
Struggling to find their way, they wandered until they noticed a bright spot, like a clearing. They
cautioned each other, “Here there must be someone; an enemy.” Arriving, they discovered a large
maloca of a yo’fí [captain], with a tidy patio. They deliberated, “What should we do? They might eat
us!” “We’ll enter singing ‘We’re venom, we’re venom (yiknkn bɵ kḛn, yiknkn bɵ kḛn),” proposed one.
Though they entered singing and using their blowpipes as dance rods, the maloquero’s sons captured
and devoured four of them, while their sister concealed the fifth, the fairest one she desired, within her
vagina. Afterward, her brothers, counting the blowpipes, questioned, “There were five, yet we killed
only four; where is the fifth?” They searched everywhere and interrogated their sister, who deceived
them, “There were four men; one had two blowpipes!” They inspected her thoroughly, avoiding only the
one place on a sister’s body a brother would not look. As her brothers gave up, she escaped to the
garden, released the hunter, and coupled with him. In time, her belly swelled. Her brothers inquired,
“Sister, how are you pregnant without a husband?” “I impregnated myself,” she claimed. They persisted,
“Are you concealing your husband? Fear not, we won’t harm him; he’s our brother-in-law now. We just
want to meet him.” She introduced him then. These brothers were human by day but nocturnal monkeys
(hoósa; Aotus sp.) by night, dwelling in a hole in a tree trunk. Once, passing this tree, the hunter
mentioned his intent to shoot the monkeys. His wife, knowing these were her brothers, discouraged him,
but in vain. The next day, he climbed the tree and approached the monkeys, but as he reached for one, it
retreated into the trunk. He thrust his hand into the hole, and then his entire arm; he sensed the monkey
was near but could not catch it, so he stuck his head inside to get a better look at the prey, but then the
monkeys decapitated him. They perforated his skull, crafting from it a musical instrument that emitted a
deep “hoo… hoo…” sound—the sound this monkey makes. The wife, upon finding his body, replaced
his head with a yam tuber, attached another yam tuber to his body as a foot, and inserted a sugar cane
flower into his hindquarters as a tail, telling him, “Now go to the river source!” He did so, transforming
into a giant anteater (seiɵkn; Myrmecophaga tridactyla). She then gave birth to a boy, whom she bathed
and encouraged to sip water from every stream they encountered. At Speaking River, she had him sip
557

water to initiate speaking; at Sitting River, to begin sitting; at Crawling River, to start crawling; at
Standing River, to stand; at Walking River, to walk; and at Running River, to run. She continued this
process, visiting each stream named for a stage of a man’s development, until they reached Dancing Rod
River, where she had him sip water so he could dance in ceremonies. Only after this did she return home
with her son.
The boy used to join his mother in the garden, where he would make toy blowpipes from whatever he
found and shoot at insects. He asked his mother, “How come everyone has a father except for me?
Didn’t I have a father?” “Yes, you had a father,” she replied. “So what happened to him?” he continued.
“A jaguar ate him,” said the mother. The boy left to look for a jaguar in the woods and, upon finding
one, he approached it, but the jaguar did not eat him. He returned to his mother and said, “You lied; I
found a jaguar, but it did not eat me! What really happened to my father?” “He fell from a tree,” she
replied. The boy climbed a tall tree and jumped, but he did not die, so he returned to his mother with the
same question. She then told him his father had died from a snakebite. As this also proved harmless to
the boy, he ceased to believe his mother.
One day, the boy saw a fly approaching his grandfather, who was searching his testicles for sand fleas
(tʉ́’e; Tunga Sp.). The boy shot at the fly but missed, hitting his grandfather instead, who immediately
shouted, “You are just like your father!” The boy thus learned he indeed had a father, although he did
not know what had happened to him. Feeling sad, he sat on the patio and, seeing a bat fly by, hit it with
a cane, saying, “Don’t you dare mock me!” The bat responded, “Why do you hit me instead of pursuing
those who killed your father? If you heal me, I will tell you what happened to him.” The boy healed him
by attaching a tobacco leaf in place of the broken wing, and the bat revealed, “Your mother’s brothers
killed your father. They decapitated him and used his head to make the ‘hoo… hoo…’ sound. They hid
your father’s blowpipe in the roof ridge, the darts on one post, and the cotton for the darts in your
mother’s bosom. With these, you can kill them. There’s a buekn [unidentified] tree where your uncles go
to eat fruits; I eat there too. At night, when I see them, I will make the sound ‘chichichichichi…
chichichichichi…’ so you’ll know when to shoot; just be careful not to hit me.” The next day, the boy,
disregarding his mother’s warnings, climbed the roof ridge and found his father’s blowpipe; he found

558

the darts on a post and took the cotton and poison (yiknkn) from his mother’s bosom while pretending to
breastfeed;187 he was now armed with a real blowpipe and darts.
He went to the forest, located the buekn tree, and positioned himself on a branch of another tree, ready to
shoot at the right moment. Beforehand, he made an agreement with an ocelot, telling it, “I’ll be shooting
monkeys from up here; whatever falls to the ground is yours to eat.” The ocelot, eager for the feast,
agreed. As night fell, he waited for the bat’s signal. When he heard the “chichichichichi,” he aimed into
the darkness and shot, hitting his target, which fell to the ground. He continued this until dawn. Below
him, the ocelot was feasting on the bodies. Returning home and finding his uncles absent, he inquired of
his mother, who replied, “They went to the forest looking for salt [plants to make salt] to prepare your
earrings (hakóa).” He then offered to remove the sand fleas from his grandfather’s testicles, applying
achiote to the treated areas. That evening, he resumed his vigil in the forest, instructing the ocelot,
“Tonight, don’t eat the fallen body right away; let me inspect it first, then it’s yours.” Heeding the bat’s
call, he shot and, descending from his perch, discovered a monkey’s corpse with red-painted testicles
beneath the tree. Recognizing his grandfather, he resolved, “Now I have avenged my father.”188 With
that, he joined the ocelot, accompanying it to its dwelling among the stars.189
M8. False Egret and the Manguaré (Nestor and Fisi, 26/10/18; Fisi, 11/1/19)
Egret190 possessed manguaré drums but was unfamiliar with their origin story, and so the drums did not
sound well. He held a River Turtle-Bamboo Dance to name his son and invited his brother-in-law,
Mister Blow Pipe (Ḭkndɨ).191 The latter ordered his son to fetch big game. The son went hunting and
spotted a jaguar, which was actually the baʼkósı̋ ɵkn spider. He killed it and carried it home. Along the
way back, he rested at one spot, and the jaguar’s blood drops created the póde̋knkn ant. Continuing on, at
his next resting spot, the blood drops gave birth to the si’pɨ ant. At the following resting spot, the tu’ko
ant arose from the blood drops. At the final resting spot, the kapada ant was formed in the same manner,
In Raquel’s version (13/7/19), the mother keeps the poison in her vagina, and the boy obtains it by shoving there a cottoncoated dart. This detail, that José may have been embarrassed to tell me, is also found in the Miraña variant of the myth
(Karadimas 2005b, 210).
188
In Fisi’s version (25/1/19), after the boy kills his uncles, he prepares a necklace from their teeth and declares: “Now I have
finished my mother’s lovers (saámḭ).” A woman’s brothers seem to be depicted as her lovers insofar as she prefers them over
her husband and protects them from her husband (and, by extension, from her husband’s son).
189
In Fisi’s version, the boy does not kill his grandfather but his mother, whose genitals he paints red with achiote.
190
It appears that this Egret is in fact Pineapple (Tomirepa), the owner-person of game animals, which is why his nephew
perceives the spider as a jaguar (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 117).
191
Also means “Dancing Rod.” Today this hero is embodied in the saditáʼű kono̰ wasp (Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 129,
n.28).
187

559

and when he arrived at the maloca patio and left the game there, the eda ants were created from the
blood. The father then ordered the jaguar to be burned, and the burned bones transformed into the hɨka
bamboo flute. He tore down the jaguar’s fangs and, on the day of the dance, gave them to his brother-inlaw, Egret. However, while Egret happily wore the fangs as a necklace, he did not give Mister Blow
Pipe enough tobacco and coca in return. The machichi jaguar spirit was heard singing. Playfully
climbing the manguaré drums, Egret’s son fell and died. Saddened and enraged, Egret realized that his
ceremonial career has finished. Since his wife could no longer bear him any children, in his wrath, he
hung her upside down so that she might at least serve another purpose—as manguaré drums, into which
her breasts transformed.
M10. The Orphans’ Flood (Fisi, 1/12/18; 12/7/21)
Tatoañei’s son, an earthworm, had sexual relations with Shadow Egg’s daughter. After she planted
peanuts in her garden, she discovered Hummingbird Egg (Pá̰di hádɨ) there and brought it home to
nurture and warm it. Hummingbird Egg made sounds that it was about to hatch, but the girl impatiently
pierced the egg with a thorn to see the bird inside. This is why Hummingbird Egg was born with one
blind eye. Nocturnal Curassow (Sábúdui; Nothocrax urumutum) used to taunt Hummingbird Egg by
singing, “Hummingbird Egg is one-eyed!” Hummingbird Egg was determined to find out who was
making fun of him, so he set traps for birds, forcing each one caught to sing its song. After a long search
[for the narration of which, the narrator imitates one after the other the songs of the different birds that
were trapped], one bird, Nocturnal Curassow, sang “Hummingbird Egg is one-eyed,” revealing that it
was he who had sung it all along. Hummingbird Egg broke his neck on the spot, Sı̰ ́di cooked him, and
the inhabitants of the Site of Tears ate him. Sı̰ ́di then ordered the two orphaned children (i’hɵ́ɵá síɵ́hɵ)
living at the Site of Tears to throw Nocturnal Curassow’s bone to the river and not to bite it.192 “But
there must be some more meat here,” said the younger brother to his elder, who initially refused to bite
the bone, but he eventually joined his stubborn brother in chewing on Nocturnal Curassow’s marrow.
However, even after the brothers passed the bone back and forth several times, they could not finish the
entire liquid. Eventually, they stuck the bone into the ground, and the marrow seeped into the earth,
becoming petrol. As it was boiling, the liquid burned the ground. Darkness fell. It was at this point that
the eagle dammed the river with its wings, and the inhabitants of the Site of Tears covered their maloca
with mud. Left outside when the water level rose, the two orphans found a seed of the tree to’nnkń
192

As orphans, they are the servants of the inhabitants of the Site of Tears, which was then still an above-ground maloca.

560

(Parkia multijuga), which was washed downriver from Egret Lake (Yo’finsí) near Hummingbird Hill
(Pá̰di Tuɒ́i, the hills of Angusturas canyon). One of them planted the seed between his toes, and it
sprouted. The tree grew, eventually stretching from the river source to the river mouth and bearing fruit.
Other animals soon joined them.193
From their vantage point, they saw Hummingbird Egg and Paternity Canoe going downriver in a canoe
from Hummingbird hill to Patawa Waterfall (Batu Fisía̋; commonly known as Cordoba cascade),
heading to the maloca of Egret of the River Mouth to obtain new fire because the flood water had
extinguished theirs. Upon their arrival there, Hummingbird Egg approached Egret of the River Mouth’s
fireplace. When Egret of the River Mouth’s daughter saw him, she told her father: “What a beautiful
Hummingbird fledgling, I want to take care of him!” “No,” said her father, “he is not a fledgling, he’s
old.” The daughter insisted, putting Hummingbird Egg near the fire, to warm up, but the father knew
Hummingbird Egg’s real intention and closed the maloca’s door with a net. Once he was next to the fire,
Hummingbird Egg examined each ember to determine which one would not burn out, until he found the
right one and ran away, burning the net which covered the maloca’s door with that ember and breaking
free. When he returned to Site of Tears, Crestless Curassow (i’hayo; Mitu tomentosum) swallowed the
ember, leaving the inhabitants of the Site without fire again. But when Crestless Curassow defecated, the
excrement came out as the tetee stone for igniting fire.
Meanwhile, the orphans heard a sudden “to!” from the tree they were on, and a fruit fell toward the river
mouth, becoming the guan of dawn (pó’kn sói, literally, “guan of sight”; pipile pipile). Another “turu!”
sounded, and another fruit fell, this time toward the river source, becoming the bird kń’fɒ of dawn
(scientific name unidentified; regional Spanish: pava colorada). Then another fruit opened, its seeds fell
to the river, becoming the sardine toya of dawn; the fruit’s peel fell and hit the to’nnkń tree, becoming
the to’nnkńteákn bat. The tree was called to’nnkń because of “to,” the sound of the falling fruit to burst,
and nńkn, “day,” because these animals prefigured the dawn. The orphans saw the sun shining from the
east and realized that they would soon become human (hɵ́ihɵ́) again. Suddenly, their mother, who had
ascended to the sky when the flood began and taken the cultivars with her, dropped chili pepper on them

193

See Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 83 n.130.

561

from above.194 “Our mother is feeding us,” said one orphan to the other, and they ate the food their
mother dropped until the water finally receded.
M11. The Multiplying Tree (Fisi, 2/1/19)
Pe’pai, a red anaconda and one of the Creator’s sons, entrenched himself underneath the Site of Tears
during the flood when it was still a maloca, traversing the maloca in the same way as the multiplying
beam traverses the maloca today. After the flood and the destruction of humanity, the orphans said to
each other: “Let’s multiply humanity again, let’s find Multiplying Anaconda (Tu’sí Hɵpɵ).” As the
waters receded, Cricket (kɵdɒ) sang to bring forth the reemergence of all that existed before the flood:
people, and all kinds of trees. As a result, the comino real tree (ma̰kapádɨ; unidentified), that had
previously also been an anaconda, grew anew, and Toucan (padase’hɵ) sat on top of it, guiding the
people, who were ants at that time, to the designated tree to fell. Cricket blessed the tree from below,
and the people felled it, carried it back home and crafted a multiplying beam from it. Upon the beam,
Green Tapir (Pa’si Ḭtɵ) and Green Earthworm (Pa’si Ḭtá) came to dance in an attempt to break it, but
Crestless Curassow (i’hayo) swallowed Green Earthworm, and so Green Tapir was unable to dance on
the beam and break it. To safeguard the beam, Crestless Curassow and Toucan danced upon it while
singing the first song of the Multiplying Tree Dance:
This is our cooled down seat (kau’ɵikupa)
Good seat (hóñóɒ kupa)
We have come here happy (hóño).

The people said: “We will multiply once again on this beam (natuɵ), we’ll multiply everything: people,
trees, food, water…” My father used to hold his Multiplying Tree dances with this story.
M12. The Pipe Blower U’ḭknñemn (José* 24/8/18; Fisi 25/1/19; Raquel 12/7/19)
[This story is modular in that different narrators add or remove episodes and place them in different
order. In Fisi’s version, the orphan pipe blower from M7 is the same Pipe Blower (U’ḭknñemn) of this
story, and we can also note a convergence between the iguana in José’s version, who warns the children
of their mother’s casabe mixed with sexual liquids, and the iguana U’ḭknñemn who kills the
grandmother urinating in her grandchildren’s pí’na̰ broth of rotten manioc leaves. The version presented

The mother would only bring all the cultivars back to earth when her son, Egret of the River Source, marries Shadow
Egg’s daughter (M3).

194

562

here is a combination of José, Fisi, and Raquel’s versions of the Pipe Blower’s story told on different
occasions.]195
Iguana (kadɨ) used to wander all around and, because he shot the blowpipe, he was also called Pipe
Blower (U’ḭknñemn). In his wanderings during the dry season, Pipe Blower saw two women called ípɨ196
who were following the course of a drying water stream, catching small fish, crabs, and shrimps with a
sieve. He cast his blowpipe aside and entered the stream at a spot ahead of them, lying down under a big
leaf. When they reached that spot, the women caught an iguana in their sieve and bit its neck to check if
he was alive; despite the pain, Pipe Blower managed to play dead. The women took him and returned
home, elated to have found a larger catch than expected. As they approached the house where they lived
alone, Pipe Blower made them hear voices and the sound of pots boiling from inside. Fearing they
would have to share their catch, they hid the iguana nearby and went inside, planning to wait for the
supposed guests to leave. However, upon entering and finding the house empty, then returning to
discover their catch also gone, they realized it was Pipe Blower, who had transformed back into an
iguana and produced the sounds to escape. Determined to catch him, the next day they went searching
him and, recognizing him by the wound on his neck, confronted him. He pleaded, “Don’t eat me, I’m
human just like you,” and offered to fish for them. After catching many fish, he joined them at home for
the meal. To his surprise, he observed them defecating from their mouths, as they lacked anuses.197 He
then proposed creating anuses for them, an offer they eagerly accepted. Removing the dart from his
blowpipe, he instructed them to turn around and then pierced their behinds, thereby creating anuses and
simultaneously transforming them into collared peccaries.
In one house he arrived at, Pipe Blower found the three children of the bʉsé beetle, who were left alone
while their parents went hunting. Before leaving, the parents had instructed their children not to play
with fire and to beware of Pipe Blower, telling them to say, if he asked, that their parents were nearby
and about to return. “Where are your parents?” asked Pipe Blower. “They are working nearby,” one
child answered. “And what did they tell you before leaving?” he inquired. “Not to play with fire,” said
the youngest child. “Can you fart like me?” asked Pipe Blower and then farted. “No, our father does not
allow us to do that,” they replied. “Why?” Pipe Blower wondered. “Because farts would burn down the
house,” the youngest answered. “He was lying; look at me, I’m farting and nothing happens!” Pipe
Some episodes were published in Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 136–41.
According to Raquel, ípɨ was the word for collared peccaries when they were still human.
197
In Fisi’s version, they defecate from their musk glands.
195
196

563

Blower declared, farting again. Encouraged, the children decided to try as well, but their farts turned out
to be flames that indeed burned down the house. Pipe Blower sewed their mouths shut and fled, finding
shelter inside the watery trunk of a nearby peach palm. When the parents returned to find their house
burned down, they understood what had happened, despite their children’s inability to speak. The father,
deducing that Pipe Blower must still be nearby, farted powerfully, burning all the trees in the vicinity
except the peach palm where Pipe Blower was hiding. Believing he had killed Pipe Blower, the father
left, allowing Pipe Blower to escape and continue his wanderings.
Pipe Blower joined a group of people who used to eat game seasoned with their grandmother’s pí’na̰
broth made from rotten manioc leaves. They would serve the broth in pots, placing them near the hole in
the river source where she lived, asking her, “Grandmother, can you pour your pí’na̰ on our meat?”198
Noticing that these people were thin and feeble despite their abundant food, Pipe Blower grew
suspicious of the grandmother’s broth. He went upriver, placed a pot near the hole, and called her, only
to witness her urinating in the pot. One day, while her grandchildren were hunting, he went to the garden
and killed the old woman with his blowpipe, then ate her. When the people returned home, they took
their pots upriver but could not get any pí’na̰ on their meat. Suspecting Pipe Blower, they checked his
teeth and found a piece of meat. “Did you eat grandmother?” they asked him. Receiving no reply, they
threw him into a stone house (fisipɨko) and closed the door,199 and closed the door, returning each day to
ask the same question and receiving the same silence. As he had no food, Pipe Blower grew thinner and
thinner, leading his captors to assume he was dead. They poked him through a hole in the door with a
fishing cane, which he smeared with his feces. When they pulled out the cane and smelled the stench,
they concluded he had died and started to rot, so they opened the door, at which point he immediately
ran away with his blowpipe in hand. To enclose the area, the people planted “devil pineapple” (fi’dudi),
all around it, known for its pointed, spiky leaves. Unable to cross this barrier, Pipe Blower asked a
tinamou to carry him on its back and fly over it. The tinamou explained it could not fly long distances,
but Pipe Blower said he would invigorate it by spitting in its mouth. The tinamou then allowed Pipe
Blower to ride on its back, flying short distances before landing and continuing only after receiving Pipe

198
199

According to Fisi, the grandmother was the giant anteater seiɵkn (Myrmecophaga tridactyla).
Fí, the same word for “mouth”—a suitable punishment for Pipe Blower’s refusal to talk.

564

Blower’s saliva. After several such flights, they crossed the barrier, and Pipe Blower thanked the
tinamou by dropping poison on its eyes to sharpen its distant vision.200
Pipe Blower is the one who fell down the manioc tree (máa̋dɵidɨtakn). In that era, manioc grew on that
tree as fruits, not as tubers, and it was the animals’ food. Lady Agouti (tɒɒkamikn; Dasyprocta sp.),
Lady Paca (ɵ́’ɵkamikn; Cuniculus paca), Lady Acouchi (si’ɵhɨkamikn; Myoprocta pratti), and Lady
Collared Peccary (sɵ’mékamikn; Dicotyles tajacu) used to pick the fruits and extract their starch that
could be used for the preparation of casabe cakes and caguana beverage on the same day. Pipe Blower
saw these women preparing manioc and accepted their offer to taste the casabe, but he immediately
became poisoned (yeḭyií). The manioc poison induced visions of future times when people would
receive manioc from the sky, growing as tubers underground, and would not be able to consume the
starch on the same day it was extracted, but only three days later. He also dreamed that manioc
preparation would become laborious, with men clearing forest plots for gardens and women toiling to
pull tubers and extract starch. In his vision, he saw all the instruments currently used for manioc work
[those not obtained from Whites or using their technology, like grating machines]. He then led the
people to cut down the manioc tree. The top of this enormous tree landed towards the river source, while
its roots pointed towards the river mouth, and its branches on the right and left fell in the directions of
the north and south banks of the Caquetá River, respectively. Different mushrooms formed on the trunk
of the fallen tree, which now provide starch for forest animals.
M14. Origin of Tobacco for Captaincy201
Paternity Canoe (O̰poipúkn; today it is the Heliornis fulica sungrebe; koé) was sent fishing with his wife
by his father-in-law, Shadow Egg. At night, while by the river, Paternity Canoe heard sighs: “Uh! ah!
ah!” coming from his father’s mambeadero, from where his father used to smoke fish. The following
morning, he found a small plant there and said, “So this is my father’s heritage! I’m going to live like
my father. I am going to have personnel like him!” Paternity Canoe blew on the plant. The People of the
Stars (fɵɵ’ko síɵ́hɵ) blew on the plant, blessing it for him, through the dew, so that it will not dry out in
the sun. The to̰’ḛdi nocturnal butterflies blew on it with their wings and fed on its flowers. Hummingbird
did the same. Paternity Canoe prepared ambíl and shared it with people. The latter said: “The captain of

In José’s version, Pipe Blower invigorates the tinamou by giving it the water of a coconut fruit, and when they reach their
destination, he tells it that from now it can call the rain by singing whenever it is thirsty.
201
Source: Landaburu and pineda 1984, 163–65.
200

565

the center of the earth is living off his father’s words.” Egret of the Center was the last one to visit him
and received four seeds in return for a pineapple, which Paternity Canoe wanted because that was the
fruit that his father used to eat at his mambeadero.
M15. Origin of Tobacco for Healing (Fisi, 19/7/19)202
Paternity Canoe, whose late father used to smoke fish, lived with Sun’s daughter. One night he took her
fishing in his canoe. “What have you caught?”, she asked him upon catching the first fish. “Finger fish,”
he replied and threw it into the canoe, where she, sitting behind his back, ate it. Then he caught another.
“What have you caught?” she asked. “Arm fish,” he replied, and she ate it as well. She went on asking,
he went on naming body parts—foot, leg, stomach, head—and she went on eating the fish. In the
morning he turned back to look at her, but there remained only blood, as the fish anaconda had eaten her
members one by one during the night. He informed his father-in-law, who told him: “you must find my
daughter, otherwise I will eat you up! [hası̰ ́ di ɵnotii, literally: ‘I do Sı̰ ́di with you’].”203 Paternity Canoe
was thinking what to do when he heard a yell at the same place where his father used to smoke fish. He
thought, “that is my father’s shadow yelling.” He went there and found a tobacco plant budding, with
four leaves. “This is Shadow Tobacco (ká’hoi tá’u),” he said. He started fishing, until a kingfisher bird
passed by, saying “Che-che-che-che-che,” thus signaling where Cashew Apple-Anaconda (Kɒ̰́n̋nkn
Hɵpɵ) was found. He managed to catch the anaconda and dragged it to the riverbank. He cut the
anaconda’s belly open and took out his wife’s bones. By blowing tobacco smoke, he put the bones back
together, recreated the veins, the flash, the blood, gave her breath again, opened her eyes, made her
stand up, and gave her back to her father, alive.
M16. False Egret and the Jaguars of the Stars204
Nénéfi, who resides in the sky, dispatched his men, the ocelots (ḭtapidɨ)205 of the stars (fɵɵ’ko síɵ́hɵ), to
descend to the earth to hunt. Along a river, they discovered fish caught in a trap, took them, and
ascended once more. When Egret of the Center, the trap’s owner, came to check his trap, he found the
fish missing and decided to conceal himself to ambush the thief. Upon the two ocelots’ return for new
prey, they removed their clothes [outward appearance; séa], placed them on the riverbank, and dived to

Another version of this myth is found in Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 180–81.
Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 188, n.2.
204
Source: Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 123–27.
205
It should be remembered that the Andoque consider ocelots as a sub-category of jaguars.
202
203

566

retrieve fish from the now refilled trap. In the meantime, Egret of the Center made off with their clothes
and returned home. Distressed, the ocelots realized they needed their clothes to return to the stars. By
nightfall, they reached Egret of the Center’s abode, requesting their clothes back, but he agreed to return
only one. After receiving a single suit, they departed, cautioning him to conceal it when guests arrived
for his dance. Disregarding their advice, Egret of the Center wore the suit to flaunt his bravery at a
dance. Upon wearing it, he looked just like an ocelot. After serving caguana to his arriving guests, he
followed them into the maloca and consumed them all. Two men torched the maloca and escaped. All
within, including the ocelot (Egret of the Center), perished in the blaze except for the ocelot’s skull,
particularly his still-moist nostril, which did not burn and emitted the sound “Re, re, re.” The nasal bone
separated from the rest and transformed into a bee, which pondered, “What are we going to do?” The
bees all said: “We will fly, our name shall be Flying Heap, we will build a home from our father’s
remnants; beside the peach palm lies our mother’s rotten leaf.” They amassed leaves and assorted debris
into a mound over the charred skull and took residence there, foraging for fruits and flowers to nourish
their offspring. They proliferated until their father’s spirit addressed them as humans do. Sı̰ ́di, another
bumblebee from above, spotted the bees and ascended to report. Consequently, Machichi, the jaguar
spirit who had sent the fish thieves, descended to earth. Wherever jaguar fangs are found, wherever
jaguar bones lie, Machichi’s song echoes, seeking vengeance for the deeds against his father.
M17. Sun and Pretty (Fisi 4/10/18)
Sun’s daughter had many suitors whom her father tested in different ways. He took his son-in-law Pretty
(Sɵ’oi) to look for plants to prepare vegetal salt. At night, after each one gathered salt plants, they lit
separate fires to burn them. While Sun was burning his plants, he saw that Pretty was lying down on the
ground to rest. “Go on, burn your salt!” shouted the father-in-law. “Fine,” replied the latter, but
remained on the ground. At midnight, Sun called him again, “Burn your salt!” “Yes, I am doing it right
away,” replied the son-in-law, and then piled the salt plants and laid next to them. The next time that
Sun called his son-in-law, the latter did not answer as he had fallen asleep, and at dawn when he would
still not reply, Sun approached him and saw that the atta ants had eaten his flesh, leaving only his bones
and head. “What happened, son-in-law?” asked Sun, and Pretty said: “Nothing, I will get up right away
and burn the salt.” When Sun returned to his maloca, he told his men—his daughter’s other suitors—that
his son-in-law would arrive in the afternoon, which he did; his head, which was all that remained of him,
bounced all the way back home. “Have you made salt?” asked him the father-in-law, and Pretty said that

567

he had, so the former went back to the forest and indeed found salt, that he could now mix with tobacco
paste. Sun informed his men: “Tomorrow we’re going to build a house together.” “But how will the
head carry the posts?” they wondered. The next day the head managed to carry them by inserting them
into the holes for earrings he had in his lobes and bouncing all the way back from the forest, doing
several such rounds. The other men goaded him to work faster; they ordered him to dig holes to plant the
posts in the ground, then scolded him by saying that the hole he dug was not deep enough. After he
jumped into that hole to deepen it, he realized what they were in fact plotting, so he started digging
horizontally, and when the other men threw sand in the hole to bury him alive, he was able to escape
through the horizontal tunnel he had created. While the others were sure that they had killed him, he
continued with his tunnel until he arrived at a water stream in which Sun’s daughter was catching small
fish and shrimps. Holding the girl’s feet, the head was swallowed by a fish, and after the latter was
caught by the girl, the head emerged from its stomach and settled on her shoulder. Whenever she tried to
eat, the head snatched her food and ate it, so she became thinner and thinner. As he was especially fond
of larvae, Sun’s men invited him to join them to a garden and dig out larvae from a palm tree. The more
larvae he ate, the more pain the girl felt all over her body, and at some point, while he was eating the
larvae that people were serving him, she managed to take the parasitic head off her shoulder, leave it
aside, and run away. The people were then able to carry out their plan of burning the garden with the
head trapped there. “Mother, come take me!” he cried while he was burning. Only his nasal bone did not
burn down, and transformed into an ocelot.
M18. The Peccary Head (Fisi, 1/11/18; 1/12/18)
Around Blazing Lake (Yadoinsí) a man organized a dance and invited his brothers-in-law. On a hunting
expedition the guests caught an entire white-lipped peccary herd with a big net and killed them to bring
the meat to the dance. Camping in the forest for the night, they disemboweled the peccaries, smoked the
large amount of meat on a wooden grill, and left aside a cut-off peccary head.206 One of the men
preferred to eat an undulated tinamou (foí; Crypturellus undulatus) instead of peccary and left at dusk to
look for one. At some distance from the camp, he saw an old man called Ka’ákɵpidɨ taking out his own
eyes and using them, instead of strips of fiber, to weave a basket.207 Back at the camp, his fellow hunters
In one narration, Fisi said there was one such raw peccary head; in another narration he talked of two.
ka’ákɵ: our eye(s); dɨ is a suffix for a male character, like kn or kamikn is for a female one; Fisi did not know what pi
means, but it is possible that pi or pí is a shorter form of the noun píɒ denoting snail. Among the Miraña, the origin of Whitelipped peccaries is traced to nuts of the chambira palm that fell on the ground, whereas the aquatic snail called ʉ́’tsJ́kò in
Miraña, and considered the peccaries’ enemy, was created from chambira nuts that fell into the river (Karadimas 2005b, 50).
206
207

568

did not believe him when he told them what he had seen, and he decided to spend the night on a tall
branch of a tree. While his fellows were asleep, he suddenly saw the old men he had previously seen
approaching the camp with a torch and with his basket. Passing from one sleeping hunter to another, the
old man took off their eyes and threw them in his basket. Groaning in their hammocks, the men finally
woke up after he left, but could not see, and stumbled on things in every step. When the sun rose, the
survivor climbed down the tree and led his blind fellows in a row to the maloca where the dance was to
be carried out. “What happened to my brothers?” Cried the maloquera as they approached the maloca
like crazy people (yoíkóa, literally: “maddening persons”), led by the survivor and the raw peccary head.
They were given tobacco paste, mambe, and manicuera, and they went around the maloca and continued
back into the forest. Their captain attached patawa [batu; Oenocarpus bataua] and whatever other small
forest fruits he could find to his people’s eye sockets to replace their eyes, but they still could not regain
their sight, and instead started walking on all fours. Their captain installed them the elongated flowers of
the (unidentified) hitámʉipa̰no plant as fangs, while the spikes of any thorny tree or bush their bodies
accidently touched stuck to them, becoming their stiff fur. They arrived at Fo’ya,208 a hill near Colibri
Hill (Pá̰di Tuɒ́i; Angusturas canyon upriver from Araracuara) where grandfather Usiñémn lived.209 Since
the forest trees were short in those days and there were no trees on Fo’ya hill, the people at the maloca
followed them with their eyes until they reached the top of the hill and “high above us as far as one’s
sight reaches” (kadai kadoɨ pó’kni, meaning the horizon/sky). Climbing down the hill from its other
side, they arrived at Faukuyadeefɵ (Forest of “Faukuya,” a bird of the Tyrannidae family; also planet
Jupiter [Andoque Andoque and Landaburu, forthcoming]), where Usiñémn attached the soft, grape-like
[unidentified] piyɒdɨkni fruits to their eye sockets, and dropped dew on their new eyes, so they could
finally see and became complete peccaries, Fo’ya’s orphans (Fo’ya yai’hɵ́ɵ; or Fo’ya yayɨḛn, “Fo’ya’s

As it lives in a shell it has created, the snail fits the container-contained dialectics that appears in this myth. Chambira fibers
are a common material for weaving baskets.
208
Fo’: to wash. Fisi and Nestor translate fo’ya as purgatorio (“purgatory”). However, although fo’ya is sometimes associated
with fire (Fo’ya yaɵɵpa, “Fo’ya’s fire”), it is not as neutral or reassuring from the point of view of the living as in the
Christian doctrine, where it merely purifies the souls of the elect dead from their sins, before they proceed to an afterlife of
eternal bliss. Fo’ya is the name given to rainstorms occurring after the death of knowledgeable people and/or evildoers,
which washes away from their souls the dangerous knowledge they have accumulated during their lifetime and their bad
qualities and tendencies, such as anger, so that these elements return to earth to haunt the living, penetrating nonhuman
beings and whatever person who is not careful enough not to get wet in that rain (some people add: or to remain lying down,
even under a rooftop, while it falls).
209
Usiñémn, whose name meaning is not clear, is also considered the grandfather of dangerous monkeys associated with
Angusturas canyon, from the spider monkey (ñḛsoɵ; Ateles belzebuth) to the mythic Ñetidi cannibal monkey. It is possible
that this name is an Andoque rendering of Juziñamui, the Murui-Muina’s creator-destructor god and equivalent of the
Andoque’s Sı̰ ́di among this people, who have traditionally inhabited that area.

569

youth”).210 Afterwards, these peccaries interrupted another ceremonial dance elsewhere, making a mess
at the maloca, so the maloquero told Fo’ya that he must pay him back (ɵpáha) for all the damage they
had done, which the latter did. This is why these peccaries, as violent and destructive to people’s manioc
gardens as they are, are very easily hunted for Head dances.
M20. The Seductive Deer (Raquel, 6/7/19)
Shadow Egg’s daughter, Hummingbird (Pá̰di), ignored her father’s warnings and recklessly left the
skins of manioc tubers overnight in her basket instead of disposing of them properly. One day, a
beautiful young man with painted face and body appeared in her garden. This man, called Yellow
Achiote Deer (Doékositoɵ),211 promised to take her and her younger sister to collect larvae from a
mauritia palm the next day. Excited, the girl skipped supper that evening and hid the casabe she made in
the pile of manioc skins in her basket so she could take it with her on the excursion. The next day,
despite her younger sister’s suspicions, she convinced her to join the excursion. At the palm, the man
felled the tree with an axe and served them the larvae he dug out to eat with their casabe, while he
himself refrained from eating. He left his axe on top of a hole in the ground leading to his underground
home to rest and noted the younger sister’s distrust of him. When the latter expressed her desire to eat
mauritia fruits from another tree he encouraged her to climb the tree herself since he could not do so. As
she found a position allowing her to cut off the mauritia bunch, he seized the elder sister and took her to
his home under the earth, whereupon the palm on which the other sister was sitting rose to the sky.
When he arrived home, he sealed the girl in a clay pot which he named “fire pot, illness [transformation]
pot” (ɵɵpadɵ, tidɵ), and left to search for firewood. His mother, who smelled a human being, found the
girl giggling inside the pot, and advised her to flee, saying that her son was not a human being but a
fi’du. The girl ran away while the mother put manioc dough in the pot to deceive her son. When the
man-deer returned, he cooked the pot and discovered his mother’s trick. He went looking for the girl,
who found shelter in Acouchi’s (si’ɵhɨ; Myoprocta pratti) hole in a tree trunk, under Anaconda’s (hɵpɵ)
“protected chest” (mánó̰ḛḭ-tutann), and under Kingfisher’s (sede; Chloroceryle amazona) “protected
wing” (mánó̰ḛḭ-púsékɵ) while he was diving in the water. The deer visited all of them one after the other
looking for his game (yasía), until the girl finally returned to her father. Meanwhile, the younger sister
was weak, hungry, and sick on top of the palm, and Red-Rumped Cacique (pʉdokɒ’ti; the Cacicus

210
211

In Raquel’s version, the peccaries are Ka’ákɵpidɨ orphans (Ka’ákɵpidɨ yai’hɵ́ɵ).
Doékositoɵ is also one of the terms for the Creator, see Chapter 2.

570

haemorrhous bird) arrived from the river source and saved her by blowing the smoke of the Bush Dog
(Speothos venaticus) Chili (pɨdoɵtu), which he named “my Chili of Making Dawn, my Chili of Breath,
my Chili of Speech, my Chili of Humanity, my Chili of Recovering Consciousness (nopó’kn̋ḭtu,
nohḛḛḭtu, nohɵɵ́ḭtu, nohɵ́ihɵ́tu, nodóikɨmonoiḭtu).” This way, Red-Rumped Cacique brought her down
the tree together with Weasel (ñɒ̰’ɒ̰́; Eira barbara).
M21. The Pineapple-Loving Tapir (Fisi, 8/12/18)
Dance Rod Painting used to damage his daughter-in-law’s garden by stomping her pineapple plants and
half-eating them, along with other fruits. The woman was sure that the intruder was a tapir, and
whenever she ate the bitten fruits she found in the garden, she suffered from different aches. The woman
asked her husband to catch the tapir, and his father recommended that he make a trap in the form of a
hole covered with leaves212 and leave a caguana from the heart of a wood, casabe, mambe, and tobacco
paste for the tapir in the mambeadero before going to sleep, which the husband did. To prepare the
particular caguana, the man poured a manioc caguana into a hole in a tree and waited for bees to enter
that hole and make honey, which he then gathered. When everyone was asleep, the father-in-law
consumed the caguana, casabe, mambe, and tobacco paste, went to the garden and fell into the trap. The
next morning, the husband checked the trap and found his father trapped inside. While on all fours, his
father ordered his son to fetch his mambe pouch, loincloth, and headdress from his hammock. When the
father put the coca pouch to his mouth, it became the tapir’s snout; when he put on the headdress, it
became the tapir’s shoulder humps, and the loincloth became the tapir’s inflated testicles when he wore
it. The husband then killed the tapir and left the game to his brothers-in-law from the river source.
M22. The Origin of Dolphins213
Green Tapir (Pa’si Ḭtɵ), who lived at the maloca of his father-in-law along the Green River (Pa’sise),
was preparing a ceremonial dance, when his sister, White Frog (Pɒyɒyɒ) told him that his wife, Lady
Peccary (Ḭńkn), sleeps with her own brother, Pretty (Sɵ’oi). Leaving his people to continue with the
dance preparation, Green Tapir set off to see his brother Tofidei,214 asking him for achiote for the dance.
After warning him that applying achiote is not a game, the brother gave him what he wanted. On his
way back home, Green Tapir prepared a spear by cutting a tree. Upon his return to his father-in-law’s

This was a common technique for capturing tapirs in the past (Pineda Camacho 1982, 40).
Source: Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 113–17.
214
Tofidei is the hero of M23 below.
212
213

571

maloca, he refused the latter’s mambe as well as the food his wife had prepared for him. Instead of
sleeping with her, he merely touched her between the breasts with his achiote-covered fingers, leaving a
red cross. On the day of the dance, Green Tapir’s sister and other people commented that his wife was
sleeping with her brother and that the two were glued to each other. Because of the achiote, the brother
could not take out his penis from the sister’s vagina, and they tried to hide by the river. Once Green
Tapir finished serving caguana to his workers, he went to the riverbank, where he found his wife and
brother-in-law still glued to each other. He pierced both their bodies with his spear and threw them into
the river, where they transformed into dolphins. He told them: “Go your way and make crazy whoever
does not know the origin of dolphin.” The water they splashed gave Green Tapir chills—this is the
origin of the dolphin’s illness. The dancers who were witnessing the scene became stones and mauritia
palms.
M23. Tofidei’s War (Nestor and Fisi, 14/8/18)215
Tofidei’s wife, Lady Cacambra (Kaókamikn; Daptridus ater), had a lover from the river mouth, a
dolphin-anaconda (ama̰na hɵpɵ) called Clearing flower (Pó’knñetaikn).216 Every day, after digging up
manioc tubers and peeling them in her garden, she used to go sit by the riverbank to wash them, where
she tapped on her gourd vessel to call the lover. The latter would then wrap himself around her leg,
climb upwards to have sex with her, and then return downriver. Consumed by desire for her lover, she
neglected her husband and no longer fed her pet (éna̰) parrot (kɒ́’i) with purple yam (Dioscorea alata).
When Tofidei was cooking the red kodi paint, the parrot approached the fireplace, cried of hunger, and
by stepping the firewood, he caused the paint to spill from the pot. Annoyed with the pet, Tofidei hit
him, and the latter told him: “You are angry at me, but you don’t know what your wife is doing! She no
longer cares for you because of her lover! Instead of me, you should hit him!” Tofidei then roasted a
yam for the parrot, who told him how his wife goes to the riverbank every day and calls her lover by
tapping on her gourd vessel. Tofidei then asked his brother-in-law Kingfisher (kokn sede; Chloroceryle
amazona) to help him catch the lover. The following day, after the woman went to the garden, Tofidei
went to the riverbank and tapped on the gourd like the parrot had instructed him. When the two dolphinanacondas, Tree Anaconda (Kń’ńdɨ Hɵpɵ) and Green/Blue Anaconda (Paseta Hɵpɵ),217 emerged from
Nestor was the main narrator, with his father Fisi occasionally commenting or correcting him.
Pó’kn: “dawn,” “clearing,” alluding to the clear view one enjoys by the river, contrary to the blocked sight within the
forest. As we will see below, these are two dolphins-anacondas.
217
In the version recorded by Landaburu and Pineda (1984, 105 n.9), the two dolphin-anacondas are called Pleasure
Anaconda (Bɨ’ɵkn Hɵpɵ) and Transformation/Illness Anaconda (Ti Hɵpɵ).
215
216

572

the water, Tofidei decapitated the one, while Kingfisher descended from the top of the maloca and killed
the other. Tofidei cut their heads and genitals off and mixed them in his wife’s chili broth. Later, the
woman went to the riverbank to call her lover[s] and was saddened as nobody came. When she returned
home, her husband told her: “Why are you sad? Go on and eat, I left a kɵrɵfe (Pimelodus sp.) in the
chili.” Upon eating the penis, its fat made her choke, and she could not stop coughing. Tofidei expelled
her from the maloca, painting her eyes red with kodi paint and transforming her into the cacambra bird,
telling her: “From now on, you will watch over the way from the river mouth, over the trail of
merchandise (dohai), for any enemy (yó’o) coming!” This is why the cacambra always makes loud,
cough-like sounds whenever it sees people approaching.218 The sardine Mnkódɵ witnessed the slaughter
of the anacondas and swam to the river mouth to report the news to their father, showing the latter his
tail, that has been stained by their blood. Angry, the father organized his personnel in the river mouth for
war, and they all started upriver to take revenge of Tofidei. The anacondas, stingrays, caimans, and all
other aggressive fish advanced by water, coming in big boats; by land came the trees, that were still
anaconda people, and by air came the cranes káfɵ (Jabiru mycteria). Tofidei’s people, who were fewer
in numbers, were afraid of the enemies, asking their captain to flee: “They are about to finish us!”
Tofidei told them: “You look just like women who grate manioc! You look like women with manioc
between the legs!”219 Tofidei prepared a spear (fɨ’ɵfá), painted it with black poison for hunting and kodi
paint, and went to the maloca’s patio, telling his men not to look when he raised it. When he erected his
spear and shouted “Hʉhʉhʉ”, the approaching enemies became trees and stones, and the boats became
the islands along the Caquetá River. Only the cranes were not transformed. Some of his own men
watching him in this operation were also petrified and can still be seen as stones in Parrot Savanna. This
is how Tofidei managed to defend against his enemies.
M24. Toucan and Lady Sloth (Mario, 9/4/19)
Toucan (Padase’hɵ; the bird Ramphastos tucanus is called se’hɵ) was handsome and the two women,
Lady Rat (Po̰’ḭ́ kamikn; it is the nocturnal rat: po̰’ḭ́ [Holochilus sciureus?]) and Lady Sloth
(Keñeknkamikn; it is hoffman’s two-toed sloth: keñekn [Choloepus hoffmanni]), who was then called
Lady Arrogance (Okɵikamikn), fell for him and became his wives. Toucan used to lounge in his
hammock, serene with his eyes closed, next to the fireplace. Lady Rat would fan the fire to stoke it, each
In Landaburu and Pineda’s version, the woman’s initial name is Lady Pulping Mauritia Fruits (So̰ḭikn), and only at this
stage she is given the name Lady Cacambra.
219
During this activity, women place the grater and grate the manioc tubers between their legs.
218

573

time spreading more ashes towards him. Over time, he became completely covered in ashes, turning
entirely grey. Eventually, he became infested with lice. While Lady Rat continued to love her husband
and prepared food for him, Lady Arrogance lost her desire for this now lazy, aged, and unattractive man.
Yet, she remained living with him, paying him little mind.
When everyone except Toucan was invited to a ceremonial dance at another maloca, Lady Arrogance
prepared herself to attend. “And your husband?” the people asked. “Why should I care about this
infested old man?” she responded. “But he’ll be upset with you!” they cautioned. Undeterred, she said,
“Tomorrow, we’re going to dance!” Lying down in his hammock, Toucan overheard her.
The next day, as the people prepared to depart, Lady Arrogance adorned herself with genipa, donned a
wreath, packed her hammock, and joined them. Watching her leave from his hammock, Toucan thought:
“Let her go! She does not know who I am!” Lady Rat inquired: “Should we join them?” “We’ll head
there shortly. No need to rush. I’ll gather some larvae to bring to the dance, prepare genipa for painting,
take my flute, and we’ll be off,” He replied. “But by then the sun will rise [ending the dance],” she
observed. “Let it rise,” he replied nonchalantly, leisurely preparing for the dance. He even decorated his
flute with chambira leaves and red paint. While Toucan was preparing to leave, his fellow Lizard arrived
and proposed they go together. “Alright,” said Toucan, “but first, paint me with this yellow clay.” Lizard
painted his own nose and Toucan’s, which is why the beak of today’s toucan has a yellow section on
top. “Now we can go!” said Toucan, who suddenly looked young, pretty, and lively. Lady Rat thought:
“How did he rejuvenate like that? He’s no ordinary man! He might do something to me [bewitch me], I
should stay by his side!”
They headed to the dance, and as they neared the maloca, Toucan suggested they announce their arrival
by playing the cricket’s song on their flutes. The attendees wondered aloud, “Who’s approaching?
Everyone’s already here. It must be the Toucan.” They then saw the two handsome young men with
their spouses arriving at the patio. The participants murmured, “Who’s that young man? It can’t be
Toucan!” From her spot near a maloca post, Lady Arrogance was taken aback. She was captivated by
this beautiful young man and told them: “This cannot be my husband. My husband is old and grey, full
of lice, how can this be him?” As Toucan sang and danced in the patio, Lady Arrogance could not take
her eyes off him. “But this is your husband!” The women told her, but she insisted he was someone else.
When Toucan and Lizard entered the maloca, singing and dancing, the maloquera joined them, gave
them manicuera and took their game [the larvae].

574

Lady Arrogance, from her spot near a maloca post, watched these dancers, and when the maloquera left
them, she got up to join the young man she was now in love with. Toucan hopped and leaped while
dancing, and she hopped and leaped with him, circling the maloca many times. When that dance ended
and the young dancers exited the maloca, Lady Arrogance waited at the entrance for the dancer’s return.
The other women whispered to each other, “This woman is silly, falling in love [nḭmá yahɵ́ñoi] with her
husband!” “I am going with this youth,” she told the others, “I am going to live with him!” “But that’s
your husband,” they reminded her, but she insisted: “How can it be my husband!” After he returned, she
spent the night dancing and talking with him. She slipped a piece of vegetal salt that she had previously
received from the organizers into his flute. He told himself: “This will happen to the man whose wife
dislikes him: she will eventually fall in love with him, mistaking him for another. And the wife who
likes him will never suffer.” “I want to live with you, do not forsake me, I don’t want to live with my
husband, I only want to live with you!” she told him. He thought to himself, “How can she think I’m
another man? I’m her husband—the one she despises.” As the dance was ending, Toucan asked his
brother-in-law, cricket sḭ’sḭ, to tangle the ropes of Lady Arrogance’s hammock to delay her after the
dance. The cricket obliged.
After the dance, Toucan bid farewell and left. Lady Arrogance hurried to untangle her hammock and
follow, but the knots delayed her. By the time she got home, Toucan was already lounging in his
hammock, old-looking and ugly as before. When she saw him, she went back to ignoring him. “How
was the dance?” he asked. “It was good,” she answered shortly. “But go on, tell me something… What
did they give you? Usually one does not return empty ended from a dance; they must have given you
something!” “No, I wasn’t given anything,” she answered. “Not even tobacco or salt? Well, then it
wasn’t a dance you went to! And why do you look so sad?” he asked, but she did not reply. “But I was
there,” he suddenly said to her, “Don’t you remember seeing me? Don’t you remember dancing with
me? Don’t you remember telling you wanted to live with me? Don’t you remember giving me this piece
of salt?” He showed her the piece she had given him. Silenced, she wondered how he had shed his old
looks and ugliness to appear as a handsome young man.
Toucan began to ignore Lady Arrogance, but the latter was again in love with him again. She watched
sorrowfully as he spoke and slept only with Lady Rat. Toucan wanted to get back at Lady Arrogance:
“She called me old and ugly, now I am going to turn her all grey-haired and wrinkled!” He went looking
for the chambira póñḛ́ḭ, whose leaves resemble long hairs. On returning to the maloca, he suggested to

575

Lady Arrogance that they bathe together, an offer she happily accepted. When they reached the small
water stream, he encouraged her to bathe first, and she agreed. She dived into the water, and while she
was submerged, he turned to a nearby short tree trunk, transforming it into her body by naming it as
such, and then attaching the chambira leaves to the top of the trunk. Uttering a spell to name the
chambira leaves after his wife’s hair, he proclaimed: “Just as white as these leaves, so too will her hair
turn white!” When Lady Arrogance resurfaced, her hair turned stark white, making her appear old. “You
were so arrogant, and now no one will desire you!” He declared. She remained this way—grey-haired,
ugly, and old. Though she still loved her husband, he no longer cared for her, and shared his hammock
only with her co-wife. Ashamed, she climbed the maloca’s posts, settling on the upper beams. With her
hands and legs tightly gripping them, she slowly made her way to the other side. Once there, she used
the ropes to descend towards her husband’s hammock. But as she reached him, Toucan grabbed her and
cast her out of the house. She landed on all fours and slowly walked away, fully transformed into a sloth.
Upset with her husband’s actions, she declared that from then on, only young men who have not yet
known a woman would be able to see her.
M25. Origin of the Carrier Band (Nestor and Fisi, 14/8/18)220
When summer arrived, Stingray (ñḛbánńéi hɵpɵ; Potamotrygonidae sp.) found itself trapped in a drying
puddle, crying for help. Woodpecker (ko’ói), felling trees nearby to clear a garden, heard the cries and
approached. While he initially feared that Stingray might eat him, the latter asked for his assistance,
requesting him to prepare a carrier band from a tree bark and carry him to its home in Blazing Lake
(Yadoinsí). Stingray promised not to eat Woodpecker as long as the latter ties the former to his back,
ensuring that Stingray’s mouth was not facing Woodpecker. After carefully weighing the risks,
Woodpecker fashioned a carrier from the bark of the bɵɵ (unidentified) tree but could only carry
Stingray a short distance before the carrier tore, causing Stingray to fall. In response, Stingray cursed
this tree, so that it would not live long. For this reason, this tree now dies shortly after bearing fruits.
Woodpecker then elaborated a carrier from the sénnkń (unidentified) tree,221 but it also tore after a short
distance, and was likewise cursed by Stingray. Subsequently, Woodpecker crafted a carrier from the
bark of the bɨsokń tree, with which he successfully transported Stingray all the way to Blazing Lake. As

Nestor was the main narrator, with Fisi correcting and commenting on his version. See also Landaburu and Pineda 1984,
184–88.
221
Called séhʉkɵ in Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 189 n.34.
220

576

a result, Stingray blessed this tree: “This tree will never perish, whenever its bark is cut or peeled, it will
heal and regrow.”
M26. Origin of the Manguaré Drum222
The ocelots of the stars heard Pineapple’s (Tomirepa) son playing his flute and coveted it. When the son
went for a bath and asked his mother to keep his toy, the star ocelots descended to earth, disguising
themselves as the son and tricking the mother into giving them the flute. When the real son returned
from his bath and asked the flute from his mother, they realized it had been stolen. Pineapple paid close
attention to where its tunes now emanated from until he heard it from the sky above. Pineapple and his
men tried to shoot arrows to the stars but could not hit them. The sick Péífirú offered his help, which
everyone initially refused, because of his poor physical condition.223 However, using special spells,
Péífirú managed to have one arrow stick to Nénéfi’s maloca in the sky, and then created a bridge with a
stick reaching up to that maloca, and climbed there224 along with his two brothers-in-law, Sardine Ant
and Perfume Ant (toyaséa and tɵrɵko, respectively). Péífirú instructed them to search the maloca for the
flute while he engaged in conversation with Nénéfi, biting him when they found it. When he met with
Nénéfi, Péífirú said, “I have come to search my son’s toy.” Nénéfi initially denied having the flute. After
Péífirú’s brothers-in-law found it, they indicated its location to him using their agreed sign, and Péífirú
demonstrated to his host that he knew where it was. Nénéfi was impressed by his guest’s wisdom.
Admitting he indeed possessed the flute, he told Péífirú that his own son cherishes it dearly. Instead of
giving it back, Nénéfi offered Péífirú his son’s toy, which would help Péífirú’s group recover and
increase in numbers after the eagle had almost exterminated it. Péífirú agreed, and Nénéfi gave him the
manguaré, along with achiote and the herb popáisako to ensure that, upon playing the manguaré, his
men would transform into human beings. Péífirú’s brothers-in-law tried to descend the manguaré
through the stick bridge, but it fell and broke upon Earth. Its pieces transformed into the tinamou pǵtotó,
the bird sapo, the toad sʉn sʉn ku’dɨ, and a cricket penko penko. Péífirú transformed them into the small
manguaré that emits sounds at night (hɵ́pɵɵ́ ku’dɨ). Nénéfi then provided Péífirú with another manguaré,
this time sending his own men as carriers—the birds tɒ́kɒ́ and boetadi and the butterflies dɨdʉpa, which
Source: Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 84–90.
Landaburu and Pineda suggest that Péífirú means “red swallow“ (síifíru) (1984, 96 n.9). According to Fisi, pei is a skin
disease (Treponema carateum? Pityriasis alba?). In view of the following footnote, Péífirú should be viewed as a
transformation of Pineapple—the outcast “orphan” of the latter’s maloca.
224
In another version recorded by these authors, it is Pineapple himself who climbed there. Landaburu and Pineda 1984, 96
n.14.
222
223

577

descended in circles. After they safely brought the manguaré to Earth and installed it in Pineapple’s
maloca, the latter rewarded Nénéfi’s workers casabe, caguana, manicuera, tobacco paste, and coca, and
organized a Head Dance.

578

Appendix 2. Conversations and Tales
C1. Conversation on the rubber genocide and on Dóñékɒi (Fisi, Nestor, and Eliran 19/1/19)
Fisi: In the Time of Peru, Pei invited Dóñékɒi to a dance in the Savanna. Pei was a Muinane captain of
the Chambira Clan. He organized a dance in the Cahuinarí, in the Savanna, and invited Dóñékɒi. During
the dance, people said, he wanted to kill him. He and several other captains wanted to fight him. Usenai
from the Bora’s Tree Clan—Usenai means “Cold Leaf”—and a few others… The Tanager Clan, the
Beetle Clan, the Agouti Clan, and some Eagles [groups of the Eagle Clan], these were Dóñékɒi’s
people, they went with him to the dance. They wanted to kill them as well. But the Muinane of the
Worm and Agouti Clans, and the Umukutui, they were on Dóñékɒi’s side. When Dóñékɒi’s people
arrived, they took their weapons and put them in a big stack there, on the side [of the maloca]. Before,
when they were on their way, some people [from that maloca] went toward him and warned him, they
said what Pei was planning, that they would kill them all… Dóñékɒi arrived only with his revolver. At
that time, he also had a rifle and a carbine [carabina rifle], but he only went with that revolver, and with
Tofidei’s colors, he was painted with achiote like Tofidei [see M23], he said: “I am going there [and I
won’t back down]. I am going to dance with my rod.” Oh, and he also brought his thunder stone, yó’őnn.
He raised it when he arrived, right at the center [of the maloca’s patio?], he extended his arm like this
[Fisi imitates the gesture] and raised his yó’őnn, and it started raining in heavy drops. Usenai told his
sons: “Wait, do not to do anything.” They were sitting inside the maloca when Dóñékɒi entered it. He
entered singing, first he sang with his rod at the entrance, then he entered. He sang: “That the people of
Egret of the Center move to one side, get closer to the maloca.”
Eliran: What is this song?
Fisi: It’s a is a formula (oración) from the story of the Speaking Tree, when Egret of the Center stood in
the middle and his allies gathered around him. This is what Dóñékɒi did. He entered and took away their
power (les quitó el poder). Usenai told him, “There, we were going to kill you. But we couldn’t.”
[Instead] they consumed mambe, they spoke. At midnight he went to the center of the maloca, stood
there, and called all the captains to collect their weapon. At something like five in the morning Dóñékɒi
shot at a peach palm in the patio, the tree split in two, and people went to gather fruits, and they went
home. Dóñékɒi’s people fired shots into the air and left, while Pei stayed by himself, eager to fight.
Nestor: And how did everyone come to have weapons?

579

Fisi: [They received them] from the Peruvians. They gave weapons to all the groups, and to the captains
they gave a revolver, a rifle, and a carbine. That was during the time when Dóñékɒi still used to fight,
afterwards he set aside his weapon to become a cacique and organize dances. And Dóñékɒi’s father gave
Yobidi Kadanni, Yinñéfɵkn’s father, the power to fight when they [Dóñékɒi and Yinñéfɵkn] were still
children.
[…]
Fisi: The problem [that caused the genocide] was that in that period [of the Casa Arana] no captain knew
the origin (principio) of exchange with Whites, of the axe. Any sorcerer [who lived] around, I don’t
know [who], Whites arrived [to his maloca], and [if] he didn’t like them, there could happen whatever,
there could be a fight. So the Whites were angry.
Nestor: The Peruvians were angry, but it was other peoples’ fault. We were the last ones they got to.
Fisi: The Andoque was the last group that the Peruvians got to, they never arrived at the center.
Everything started when they sent some priests and nuns from La Chorrera to evangelize the Andoque,
and on their way here people killed them and raped one of the nuns, who managed to run back to La
Chorrera and tell what had happened. But those priests never arrived here. Maybe it was the People of
Ara or Toad or Opossum [Andoque clans] who killed them, who knows? The Peruvians were angry,
many people came looking for the killers, and everyone told them, ‘The Andoque, the Andoque [killed
them], [they live] there!” So they got here angry. They took the clan captains, made a pillory, put
Dóñékɒi, Foki-Foki [Yinñéfɵkn], in the pillory… When he [Dóñékɒi] was there they raped his wife,
Paifokn, they passed a stake through her vagina and this way they killed here. Then they killed his
father, Padamnta, they burned him. Foki-Foki saw everything. They burned many people, they chopped
them. They took many people, like [the number of people that can fill the distance] from here [the
maloca] to the Caquetá, people said, in two rows… to Matanzas. And they sent people to work, to bring
rubber.
Eliran: Why did they keep Dóñékɒi and Yinñéfɵkn in the pillory instead of killing them like they did to
the others?
Fisi: They put the captains in the pillory, and Dóñékɒi was a captain, he learned from his father about
the War of the Speaking Tree, [about] everything…
Nestor: And Jimmy Fuke [Yinñéfɵkn, who was not a captain]?

580

Fisi: He was young… They put many people in the pillory, and many people died. Dóñékɒi didn’t die.
He told Yinñéfɵkn, “You need to be a man, don’t cry! Nothing will happen to us, we will be fed from
the sky.” Then, I don’t know how, Popa, a woman gave them some water, she managed to secretly pour
them some water in the mouths, she managed to slip in their mouths a little bit of coca, a little bit of
ambíl…
Nestor: There was a family that they [the Peruvians] took as servants, and that woman passed by there
and gave them coca and ambíl, it gave him [Dóñékɒi] force to ask help from the Creator. And with that
coca they survived at the pillory. Many elders died there of hunger, but he sustained himself for a long
time, for months, with that casabe that fell on them from the sky, that we told you about the other day
[“The Orphans’ Flood”, M10 in Appendix 1]...
Fisi: [The casabe] of the Orphans!
Nestor: And they sent people to make a big garden, somewhere around here… to plant manioc, corn,
rice, sugar cane. And they would make alcohol from the sugar cane, and that Normand used to get
drunk, and that made the disorder all the bigger. In that big garden he forced women to work, and those
who wouldn’t work, he sent them to cut firewood, there was a large of pile of firewood… And those
who wouldn’t work, he roasted them on the fire and gave them to his dog as food, he had a dog that
loved to eat roasted people. And the women who worked in the garden, who had a child, because the
mother did not have time to feed the child, he cried, so they took and pum! [makes the sign of thrashing
the child against something].
Fisi: They held it by its feet, cut off its head, and threw it to the fire.
Nestor: And the dog ate it.
Fisi: If the mother cried, they would also throw her into the fire.
Nestor: That was at the garden. And they drank and killed the paisanos (Indigenous people). But then
arrived the investigation, to check if it was true that they killed them. They pricked my father’s
grandfather’s [Dóñékɒi] hand and drew blood, and saw that, “No, this man did not kill anyone.” So they
released him from the pillory, him and Yinñéfɵkn.
Eliran: What do you mean, how could they check that?
Fisi: We don’t know, but people said that they pricked people’s fingers and then squeezed the finger and
it bled on a piece of something like a mirror, people said, and then they said [to one man], “You killed,”
581

[and said to another] “You didn’t kill,” [they said to a third man] “You killed,” [and to a fourth] “You
didn’t kill.”
Eliran: And they found the ones who had killed the priests?
Nestor: Yes, and they killed them on the spot.
Fisi: These were the people that they burned. This is when people fled to the forest. And they sent
people to search them, to kill them and to bring only their fingers, of the right hand.
Nestor: And the captains that they released, they sent them to work rubber with their clans. Each clan
needed to work with its captain. It was then that the goods (mercancía) entered. It first entered through
the Muinane’s territory, to the Pineapple Clan, and after the captain of the Pineapple Clan, it entered the
Andoque [territory].
Fisi: The goods entered where the Andoque [lived] twice, people said, and I don’t know how many
times they went to leave rubber at La Chorrera, by land, and there they would also be killed.
Nestor: When people went to look for goods at the Muinane’s territory, Opossum Clan, Ara Clan, Toad
Clan, and Yarumo Clan are the ones who went.
Fisi: Only at the end, they arrived at Yobidi Káda̋nni [Yinñéfɵkn’s father, at his maloca].
Nestor: And the more the goods entered the Andoque territory, the more the goods were distributed
among the captains. So they made the captains commit to collect rubber to pay for the goods, axe,
machete, clothes, all the things. And because there were some Indigenous that received the goods but
did not work, as it always happens, then the captain remained indebted, because they accepted the goods
and ran away. Then it came to pass that they forced the captains to work to pay the debts. So by then it
was the people’s fault that the captains were punished, they needed to look for their own people, to make
them work.
Fisi: It was then that they gave them carbines.
Nestor: They gave them carbines to make the people work. And the more [rubber] they gathered, the
more they [the Casa Arana agents] wanted. And people say that initially they got a lot [of rubber], but
then as they cut the trees with machete more and more—because they used machete, not scraper
(rasqueta) like today [in more recent rubber work periods]—so the trees didn’t yield any more rubber,
they yielded just a little bit. And they [the company agents] wanted more, but the trees didn’t yield

582

anything, so people ran away. And they sent the Indigenous like soldiers, to catch those who had ran
away.
Eliran: And it never happened that people refused the goods?
Nestor: No, because of people’s needs (necesidades) no one refused it. And then people became
indebted, and this made them kill more Indigenous, because I think that the Arana, they were also
indebted to their bosses. But there was no longer any rubber. Throughout the territory, around La
Chorrera… the trees didn’t yield, didn’t yield, or very little. So they killed them, they even forced the
captains themselves to search them and kill them. And Arana contracted many people who would look
for others. He contracted the Andoque to search the Uitoto, and the Uitoto to search the Andoque. And
this way he instigated war among the paisanos themselves. And they gave them rifles, and everyone
were armed. After a long time… Oh and another way for them to torture people, that was for girls, they
would cut out their vaginas with a knife and would then rape them, put their penis. And this way their
killed them. This way we were exterminated. Until Miguel Zumaeta arrived. He was the one who pulled
out…
Fisi: He pulled out Normand.
Nestor: And people said that Normand had spoken Andoque perfectly.
Fisi: He spoke, he sang… Zumaeta arrived during an Andoque dance, and Normand was hiding among
the Indigenous, he told them: “Don’t rat on me!” And he danced with his rifle among the people [as if it
were a dancing rod]… But someone told Zumaeta, “It’s him!” [referring to Normand] so and he
[Zumaeta] arrested him.
Eliran: But why did Zumaeta arrest Normand?
Nestor: Because there was a commission that investigated and discovered that Normand was killing the
Indigenous, and it was already during the war with Peru, so the army arrived to pull him out.
Fisi: And Miguel Zumaeta was a soldier.
Nestor: He was a soldier, he was the commander of a unit that came to arrest Normand. From all around,
many [Peruvian] soldiers entered Colombia.
Eliran: So Zumaeta did not come here first for rubber; he came here as a soldier?

583

Nestor: Exactly, he followed orders. He took Normand and left. But then he saw that rubber work was
good, so he came back, after he left Normand in chains in Peru, he came back this time not as a soldier,
but to work rubber. But he said that they were going to change the way they worked. That they are no
longer going to kill people, they will not kill those who worked. And that once again they can have their
culture. So they organized: when they are going to have dances, and when they are going to work. So
Dóñékɒi no longer thought about fighting, they have left their weapons. But then another Peruvian task
force arrived, to take the Indigenous [to Peru], and the Colombian army arrived to protect Colombians
here. So Miguel took the Andoque to the Metá [River], he said that the Peruvians want to take them
away from here. So they already arrived [to the Metá], they already made their camps, their gardens…
And just when the manioc was like this [Nestor signals the height with his hand], like a meter or half a
meter high—this is what Rosa Alba, Mario’s mother, said, that they were about to work in the garden [to
gather manioc tubers], they were about to work also rubber [after preparing fariña from the manioc]. So
when the Peruvian commission arrived here, they didn’t find anyone. They took everyone [those they
found in other territories] to Peru to work rubber. When they arrived, they found the X [another
Indigenous people whose name is redacted], the Y family [of that people, idem], and they were the ones
who ratted on them, they told them: “They are at the Metá.” Who took them, dad, Loayza?
Fisi: Carlos Loayza.
Nestor: He was the one who took them to Peru. All the Andoque they took.
Fisi: There they took Miguel Zumaeta and Pisé Káda̋nni, Heli’s father, because Dóñékɒi hadn’t arrived
yet [back to the camp where they were found?]. They told him: “Don’t run away.” He [Pisé Káda̋nni]
had a carbine and a basket full of caimito [?]. He said, “No, I want to see my son, I am going to be a
father.” And they released him [Pisé Káda̋nni], and then when he [Dóñékɒi] came, they took him and
released Pisé Káda̋nni. They took him in chains to Peru, him and Miguel Zumaeta.
Nestor: They took Dóñékɒi and Zumaeta to Peru, and the other people they released [from their chains],
and it was in four boats (lanchas), I think…
Fisi: Four, Four.
Nestor: …they took them to Peru. And the manioc, the soldiers cut it down and threw it into the water.
And those who stayed there starved to death. And it was then that some children were hiding, I would
say about eight, eleven years old. Among there were To̰fi, Yiñékɒ…

584

Fisi: These were To̰fi, Yiñékɒ… To̰fi was a little older. Yiñékɒ told him, “Let’s hide.” They entered a
hole in the ground and from there they saw many people going…
Nestor: To̰fi was older, but Dóñékɒi had told him, “This is my son, someday he may be useful for you”
(un día, de pronto, les va a servir). After they all left, Rosa Alba who was hiding with her grandmother
or aunt came out, all those who were hiding came out, but they were all children… So they took them,
and somewhere there [in Peru?], one of Miguel’s friends released him from his chains, and he ran away.
From there I believe that Mnkoena also ran away.
Eliran: The Oropendola [from the Oropendola Clan]?
Nestor: Yes. He and Miguel ran away and found once again some Andoque, and he [Miguel] worked
rubber with them.
Eliran: How many years would you estimate passed between the first time that Zumaeta arrived, as a
soldier, and the time they deported people?
Fisi: We don’t know.
Nestor: This is something that we don’t know.
Eliran: Yiñékɒ existed when Zumaeta arrived as a soldier?
Nestor: Yes. Because they had already baptized him [they gave him a name at a dance before Zumaeta
arrested Normand].
Eliran: And how old was he when they took away his father?
Nestor: I think that… Like whom would he be [in terms of age]? Like Jeffy [a boy, Nestor’s cousin’s
son]? I think that he was eleven or twelve years old.
Fisi: Yes, something like that.
Eliran: And at what age would they baptize him, when he was a year old?
Nestor: A year or less, six months. They followed the rules and baptized the children when they were
very young. They baptized him at a River Turtle-Carrier Dance. Then he [Dóñékɒi] did Tu’si Dance,
where he changed everyone’s names.
Fisi: My father was baptized at Carrier [Dance], and after that they made the Multiplying Tree [beam],
and sang about him… My father told me all of this. Zumaeta arrived at a dance of the Pa’si ɵhɵ [the

585

Tanager Clan], I don’t know who was the organizer of that dance. Normand was dancing there, painted
like an Indigenous, and told people not to say anything. Dɒi was the one who told them [laughs]. He
said, “That one over there, who dances ahead [is the one you are looking for].”
Nestor: When Miguel came as a soldier, Dóñékɒi had a maloca on the Oédisé?
Fisi: Yes, Oedise.
Eliran: The Yarí [River, also called Oédise]?
Nestor: No, the other Oédisé, at the center, where Sɒ̰’ḛ [a mythological figure] fished with barbasco.
Dóñékɒi’s maloca was located there, near the headwaters. That’s where he lived when Zumaeta arrived
as a soldier. And when he returned to work rubber, Dóñékɒi already lived here, right?
Fisi: I was told that later on, they [the Peruvians] took them [many people], and Dóñékɒi grouped those
who stayed, with Zumaeta. It was during that time that he celebrated the Multiplying Tree with those
who stayed. And later, when they came again to take them, that’s when Zumaeta took them to the Metá.
After he came here, to Pa’sipḭpɨkń [Tanager Hole], they already knew that Loayza was coming for them.
Eliran: What is Pa’sipḭpɨkń?
Nestor: It’s an anaconda hole, a site,
Fisi: Tanager Hole.
Nestor: An anaconda hole called Tanager Hole, a site where Yiñékɒ lived a long time ago, at the
Savanna,
Fisi: The Savanna of Feikɵsé.
Nestor: Of Feikɵsé, where Yiñékɒ lived, where his father worked rubber, he had a camp there.
Fisi: That’s where they were told that people were coming to take them once again. This is where he
lived with the few who remained.
Nestor: First, they took the captains to the pillory, looking for the killers. Then they took them to Peru.
Those who remained, he organized them and made a maloca. And then Miguel arrived. So when
Normand was [there], he started the maloca.
Fisi: No. I have said that after they took them to Peru, Dóñékɒi made a maloca. But Dóñékɒi did not
have a maloca when they took Normand.

586

Nestor: When they took Normand away, they also took more people?
Fisi: Of course, they took a few people away.
Eliran: And afterwards, when Miguel returned to work rubber, he returned as a worker for the Casa
Arana?
Fisi: Yes, he was an overseer, because he was a brother-in-law of Julio César Arana. They sent him to
finish off the people here.
Nestor: So Miguel Zumaeta also took many Andoque away?
Fisi: Miguel Zumaeta didn’t take [them]. Those who took [them] were the others.
Nestor: So I don’t understand, tell it like the elders told it to you.
Fisi: I know what my grandmother told me. She said that first there was Muñoz [as an overseer], then
“Conejo,” when Conejo was there they were still making gardens, and after Conejo, Normand came.
While Conejo was there, my father was born, she said. And when Normand arrived, my father was
already alive. Then it was that they killed people. Paifokn was Dóñékɒi’s first wife, that they killed with
a stake. My father grew up and it was when his father was gathering the people anew after they had
taken them away, that they [the British? The Peruvian government?] became aware of what Normand
was doing, that he was killing people and all that. So when they took people away for the last time,
Zumaeta arrived and kicked him out, as people said. And then those who remained, remained with
Zumaeta. And when he [Zumaeta] was there, nobody died. He told people to make gardens again. But
before they took him away, people said that Normand had told Dóñékɒi: “Now you need to kill those
who killed your father, who burned your father.” “Yes,” he said, “He was old, but I am alive.” [And
Normand said:] “We killed your wife because she was with a black man.” “Good,” he said. [And
Normand said:] “Now you need to take revenge of the people who ate your father.” They gave him a
carbine and sent him to search those people [mentions some people of neighboring groups], to kill them
and bring their fingers back. Muñozo [sic] killed many people. Conejo also killed. Then Normand
finished off many people.
Nestor: So Normand wasn’t the one who gave the order to kill Padamnta? It was Muñozo?
Fisi: Conejo. It was Conejo. Conejo told them to do it. Normand whipped many, he ordered to whip
them, and some people died like that. Conejo is the one who sent people to make a big garden, a big
bridge, a big path to La Chorrera.
587

Nestor: And when there was Matanzas [when it was founded], Normand was already there?
Fisi: Yes, when they founded Matanzas it was already with Normand [in charge], with the pillory. But
Normand was planning to build another camp that would be called Casa Andoque on the Iknsé [Pamá
River] and Zumaeta ordered to take it out [to dismantle the new camp].
T4. The Adventures of the Piercers (Yɒ’nnkn; Raquel, 9/7/19)
The Piercers lived in Ádukoe (“Abode [?] of Red Macaw”), which is today the hill of Araracuara. But it
was already known by then that we, the real human beings, would be formed and replace the Piercers as
humanity. The Piercers spoke our language, but not very well. Instead of saying “him” (yika), they said
“her” (nḭka). When one said “I,” he would say ñemḭno̰ [using the feminine form instead of the masculine
one]. Their captain, Ádukoe, held a Carrier Band Dance to check if they could save themselves and
continue living like humans. “You have to sing,” he told them. The Piercers were stubborn and crazy,
they did everything wrong. During the caguana distribution ceremony, he ordered each to sing. The first
sang, but in Miraña and not in Andoque, “The tapir and agouti finished my manioc.” The second also
sang in Miraña, “In the mouth of this river, there is a pintadillo fish; we are going to shoot it with an
arrow.” But Ádukoe said, “No, this does not hold any sense of salvation. You try now,” he turned to his
brother-in-law. The latter raised and sang, “The manioc of our mother is our manioc of multiplying
people,” and Ádukoe’s cultivars cheered to express their joy—this is why he was spared. When the sun
rose, Ádukoe told the Piercers: “Today, [in the Carrier Dance], we must sing well.” He instructed them
to make dancing rods with stripes of the bɨsokn tree bark, but they could not use it properly—when they
approached the maloca, hitting the ground with their rods, they hit them on the pointed side [instead of
the flat one]. They sang in Andoque but added Miraña words, and Ádukoe expressed disapproval of
their songs. He told them, “Let’s give names, you need to give yourselves names, but do it well! After
all of you, I will also give myself a name.” One of them raised and declared, “As part of my clan, my
name is ‘She roasted an iguana with her sister-in-law.’” They said such nonsense, that Ádukoe said,
“No, not like that! Name yourselves well!” Another raised and declared, “As part of my clan, my name
is ‘My loincloth covers my loin.’” Ádukoe likewise disapproved of this naming, ordering a third Piercer
to raise and give himself a name, but the latter said, “According to my origin, I will call myself ‘Fallen
Shit.’” They were all crazy, didn’t I tell you? [Raquel is laughing]. Ádukoe said, “No, there is no
salvation here. Now will sing Egret Bone [Yo’fitann], but you must not go outside and look at him while
he sings; those looking will turn into animals. Only the ones who do not look will remain here with me.”

588

Egret Bone sang outside the maloca, in a song that sounded like a long whistle that reached to the sky.
Most of the Piercers could not resist the temptation to leave the maloca and behold the singer, thus
transformed into peccaries, tapirs, and other animals. Apart from Ádukoe, his brother-in-law, and his
wife Kasétañékn (“A Custom [Typical Event] of Our River [Caquetá]”), who were “enchanted” (se
encantaron) and keep living in an invisible mode in Araracuara, only three other Piercers survived—two
brothers and their sister.
These three survivors escaped by entering into the earth and then flying in the air until they reached La
Pedrera. But there they also heard Bone Egret singing, so they returned upriver, reaching the mouth of
the Hḭ’ḭse (Drawing River), where they killed an anaconda which was well painted—this is why they
named the river this way. They gave names to all the streams between the Hḭ’ḭse and the Áduse. At the
mouth of the Áduse, they saw a bird on top of a tall tree. “What is it?” asked one of them. “It is a red
macaw (ádu),” replied another, and so they named the stream Macaw River (Áduse). They followed
Macaw River till Tar Waterfall, where they made offerings, consumed them, and fought anacondas,
stingrays, and all other dangerous creatures that can endanger human beings. They continued to the
waterfall called Basketful of Entrails (Ḭñéfɵ́’piɵ), where the sister menstruated, but full of shame, she
kept preparing food for them, instead of abstaining from it due to her state. After the two brothers ate her
food, they dived into the water in a bid to fight monsters, but her menstruation had already cut down
their sorcery powers, and they lost the fight against the “scissor fish” (pǵ’ǵdɨ; unidentified) further
upstream. The scissor fish cut them by half, and so their lungs and entrails were carried downstream to
Scissor Fish, Lungs, and Basketful of Entrails Waterfalls (P¦́’¦́dɨfisia, Pe’sɒfisia, and Ḭñéfɵ́’piɵ,
respectively). This is how the Piercers ended, although others say that they continue living in other
forms, within the water; but I know that they ended like this, this is how Yinñéfɵkn told it to me.

589

590

Appendix 3. Yiñékɒ’s Survivors Group
Table 14. The members of the survivor group that was formed in La Palma
Number

Indigenous Name

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Yiñékɒ (Feverish Fluff)
Mɵɒ (Good Smelling Bird)
Pa̰’fó (Beautiful Tanager)
Fɵtoi (Biting beetle)
Pɵpɵdɨkn (Pɵpɵ Toad’s Color)
Pɨséi Kadanni (Auguring Eagle)
Doʉsn (Anaconda Pattern)
Bu’danʉikn (Descending [Eagle])
Hóñoéna̰i (Beautiful Pet)
Bʉdɨ (?)
Daásʉ (Tanager on the Tree/Paca on the
Ground)
Fa’to (Illuminate for Searching [Paca])
Duñékɒ (Water Fluff)
Kɒḛtaihakn (Sucked Flower)
Duusénnkn (Water on Mauritia Leaf)
Dokɒpaikn (Yellow Mauritia Stem)
To̰fi (Short Deer’s Hair)
Hɵ́má Dóiknɵ (Not Letting to Take
[Ants])
Daifi (Clean Agouti Door)
Peadukn (Red Feather Ornament)
Kañe (Sharing Paca Meat)
Áduo̰hekn (Ara Bathing Spot)
Fʉha ([Worm’s] Mucus Trail)

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Civil Name or
Nickname

Sḭkɒ (?)
Íntafiɵ (Fleshless Head)
Hɵnfɵi ([The Seen Shadow Has]
Disappeared)

María
César
Margarita
Ines
Carmen
Alejandro
Nestor
Cecilia
Okai
Durán
Cecilia
Rosa Alba
Umberto
Rosa China
Sofía
Pedro

Sex

Clan

M
F
F
M
F
M
F
F
M
M
F

Eagle
Tanager
Tanager
Beetle
Toad Pɵpɵ
Eagle
Anaconda
Eagle
Spix’s Guan
Spix’s Guan
Tanager/Paca

M
M
F
F
F
M
M

Paca
Eagle
Tree
Mauritia
Mauritia
Deer
Ant

M
F
F
F
F

Agouti
Eagle
Paca
Ara
Muinane
(Worm)
Toad Ohé
Miraña (Paca)
Shadow

F
M
M

Pa̰’fó (numbered 3 in Table 13) and her mother Mɵɒ (2) were at the heart of the kinship network of the
crystallizing Andoque group: Pa̰’fó’s younger brother César (4) would become a close ally of Yiñékɒ;
her cousin Pedro (25) of paternal Miraña descent and uterine Andoque (Tanager) descent, who initially
had a non-Andoque wife, would later cement his allegiance to the group through marriages with
Andoque women and be given by Yiñékɒ an Andoque identity of the Sun Clan; the more distant kin
591

Alejandro (9) and his brother Nestor (10), who were related to Mɵɒ through their surviving mother (11);
and Mɵɒ’s nephew, whose name my interlocutors do not know as he died on the way to the territory, but
who connected to Mɵɒ his wife Rosa Alba (15), her mother (16), and her classificatory cousin Umberto
(18). The only consanguineous relative that Yiñékɒ had in the group was To̰fi (17), who was also Mɵɒ’s
classificatory nephew, whom she nursed after his mother’s death, and who had Cecilia (14) as a wife in
La Palma before uniting with Rosa Alba after her husband’s death. To̰fi’s children, Mario and Raquel,
explain that upon uniting with Pa̰’fó, Yiñékɒ started referring to To̰fi as “brother-in-law” instead of
“uncle,” which was the appropriate term given their genealogical relationship. In other words, beside his
wife, the matrimonial union gave Yiñékɒ access to eleven individuals whom he could recruit for work
out of a group of twenty-five people.

592

Appendix 4. Name Giving in Ceremonial Dances
Table 15. prestigious ceremonial name givings among the Andoque from the 1930s onwards
Civil Name

Indigenous
Name

Father225

Mother

Birth
Decade

Name
Giver

Name
Giving
Dance

Magdalena

O’taihákn
([Mauritia]
Flower)
Hɵ’pɵɵyoɵ
(Night
Walking
[Ant])
Hɵ́ñodíéi
(Beautiful
Water)
Pɨ’danni
(Carved
[Deer])

To̰fi

Rosa Alba

1930

Yinñéfɵkn

Armadillo

Umberto

Teresa

1940

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

Duñékɒ

Sofía

1940

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

To̰fi

Rosa Alba

1940

Yiñékɒ

Joselito

Mo̰da

1950

Yiñékɒ

River
TurtleCarrier
Band
Armadillo

Alejandro

Carmen

1950

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

Pedro

Ines

1950

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

César

Abigaíl

1950

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

Yiñékɒ

Pa̰fo

1950

Yiñékɒ

Fausiya

Yiñékɒ

Pa̰fo

1940

Yiñékɒ

Fausiya

Yinñéfɵkn

Sofía

1960

Yinñéfɵkn

Armadillo

Rafael
Mucutuy

Magdalena

1950

To̰fi

Armadillo

Alfonso

Alfredo

Mario

Andrés

Rosa

Milciades
(Tañe)
Nelson

Rodolfo
Irene

Juan
Narciso

225

Petoñékɒi
(Trying Out
[Eagle] Fluff)
Pɵsifokn
(Dark Spix’s
Guan)
Táñei
(Stationary
[Sun])
Hɵ́ñopɨkoɵ
(Beautiful
[Beetle]
House)
O’defɵɒ
(Stone Forest)
Kḛikn (Seated
[Eagle])

Káda̋nni
(Eagle)
Parai (Sound
of Defecating
Worm)

An absent father who has not assumed paternity of the child is replaced with X.

593

Comments

Given a name
alongside her
younger brother
Rodolfo

Civil Name

Indigenous
Name

Father225

Mother

Birth
Decade

Name
Giver

Name
Giving
Dance

Iván

U’ʉe’i (Worm
Climbing a
Tree)
Nnka
(Trapped
[Deer])
P‚́aidíeikn
(Water Hole)
Se’be
([Deer’s] Ear)
Dópɵ́ñékɒikn
(Splitting
[Eagle] Fluff)
Yo’díeikn
(Fast Flowing
Water)
Pó’kni
Káda̋nni
(Woken Up
Eagle)
Hɵ́ñoi
(Beautiful
[Face of the
Moon])
Úai (Setting
Sun)

Rafael
Mucutuy

Magdalena

1950

To̰fi

Head

To̰fi

Rosa Alba

1940

To̰fi

Head

X

Irene

1960

Yiñékɒ

X

Raquel

1960

Yinñéfɵkn

Multiplying
Tree
Armadillo

Heli

Isabel
Macuna

1970

Yiñékɒ

Multiplying
Tree

Heli

Isabel
Macuna

1970

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

Alfredo

Beatriz

1960

Yiñékɒ

Armadillo

Milciades

Irene

1970

Yiñékɒ

Delio

Isabel
Moreno

1960

Yiñékɒ

Raquel

Yaneth
Miryan
Nancy

Iris

Jesus
Miguel

Hernando

Ó’dufɵ
([Eagle]
Feather)

Fisi

Isabel
Macuna

1970

Yiñékɒ

Arcadio

Yoañei ([A
Deer at a]
Standstill)

Mario

Gloria

1970

Yiñékɒ

Heidy

Dʉ’danaḭkn
(Landing
[Ant])
Siha’fiɵ (Bent
Knee Beetle)
Doáñe̋i (Slow
Moving [Sun])

Alfonso

María
Sabina

1980

Fisi

River
TurtleCarrier
Band
River
TurtleCarrier
Band
River
TurtleCarrier
Band
River
TurtleCarrier
Band
Armadillo

Nelson

Luz
Ángela
Irene

1980

Fisi

Armadillo

1980

Yiñékɒ

River
Turtle-

Wilson

Orlando

César
Willer

Milciades

594

Comments

Given a name
alongside her
nephew Iván

Civil Name

Indigenous
Name

Father225

Mother

Birth
Decade

Name
Giver

Name
Giving
Dance
Carrier
Band
Multiplying
Tree

Faber

Peɒí (Red
Sun)

Orlando

María

1980

Milciades

Levy

Pó’kńiḭɒ̰
(Dawning
Sun)
Fó’ikn
([Summer
Has] Ended)
Fɨɨí (Windy
[Sunny Day])
To’beó̰ Pódi
(Deer Face)

Milciades

Irene

1970

Milciades

Multiplying
Tree

Wilson

Nora Alba

1990

Milciades

Multiplying
Tree

Willer

1990

Milciades

Arcadio

Sandra
Milena
Astrid

2000

Mario

Dʉ’aifí (Fallen
Beetle)
Du’dannikn
(New [Deer’s]
Hair)
Yʉñefɵikn
(Cuts [in the
Deer’s Flesh])
Fisiɒi (Rock’s
Edge)

César

Ana

2000

Fisi

Multiplying
Tree
River
TurtleCarrier
Band
Armadillo

X

Silvia

2000

Mario

Armadillo

Elias

Silvia

2000

Mario

Head

X

Isabel

2010

Fisi

Dópuikn
(Yellow
[Manioc]
Leaf)

X

Emilse

2010

Fisi

River
TurtleCarrier
Band
River
TurtleCarrier
Band

Katya

Jean Carlo
Ronny
William

César
Andres
Mayerly

Raquel

Mártin

Ixia

595

Comments

Given a name in
this dance as an
adult
Given a name in
this dance as an
adult

Given a name
alongside her
cousin Mártin

Table 16. Individuals named as “adults” in the Fausíya Dance held by Yiñékɒ
Civil Name or
Nickname226
Durán

Joselito

Rafael

Carlos

Yoaquím

Ignacio

Y

Heriberto

Do’akɵi
(Watchful
[Eagle)
Y

Vasilio

Heli

Carlos
César
José

227

Sa̰díei
(Immobile
Water)
Si’ídu
Kadanni
(Vulture
Eagle)
Fisitude
(Small Rock)
Ñeɒ̰ Káda̋nni
(Wholly
Black Eagle)
P‚́’tann
(Licked
[Eagle]
Bone)
Fá’se̋i
(Nickname
meaning
“Roasted”)
Y

Germán

226

Previous
Indigenous
Name227
Duñékɒ
(Water Fluff)

Y (Nickname
Unknown)
Tɵ́pɨkoɒ
([Beetle’s]
Dry House)

New Indigenous
Name

Father

Mother

Birth Decade

Fisi Káda̋nni
(Eagle [Seated
on a] Rock)
Ḭsíaknta‚́
(Hunting Site)

Si’ídutann

Áduo̰hekn

?

Pakn’dadiei

?

?

Doɨ Káda̋nni
(Eagle Up High)

Pakn’dadiei

Mo̰da

1930

Hɵɵbe Káda̋nni
(Torch Plant
Eagle)
Mi’noḛ Káda̋nni
(Eagle of the
Mi’noḛ Herb)
Dótanni
(Obtained
[Eagle] Bone)

Pakn’dadiei

Mo̰da

1930

Joselito

Mo̰da

1940

Joselito

Mo̰da

1930

Hɵ́ñotanni
(Beautiful
[Eagle] Bone)

Pɨséi Kadanni

Inés

1940

Yo̰ntai
(Ascending
[Eagle])
Bɒ́’kái ([Game]
Grasping
[Eagle])
Fantói
(Ambushing
[Eagle])
Faʉñékɒi (Far
Seen Fluff)
Fɵtoi (Biting
beetle)
Bʉañei (Grasped
Beetle)

Yiñékɒ

Pa̰’fó

1950

Yiñékɒ

Pa̰’fó

1950

Rafael

Carmen

1950

Durán

Sofía

1940

Mɵɒ

?

Rosa China

1940

César

The inexistence or my ignorance of a civil name is marked with X.
Lack of a previous name is marked with Y.

596

Civil Name or
Nickname

226

Sofía

Carmen

Beatriz
Otilia
Regina

X

Previous
Indigenous
Name227
Fʉha
([Worm’s]
Mucus Trail)
Bu’danʉikn
(Descending
[Eagle])
Seʉdíeikn
(Dirty Water)
Y
Fʉ’ka
(Stretched
[Grub])
Mo̰da
(Plucking [a
Cacique
Bird)

New Indigenous
Name

Father

Mother

Birth Decade

Paḛtaikn (Clean
Worm)

?

?

?

Bu’dieikn
(Whirling Water)

Pɨséi Kadanni

Inés

?

Fíodíeikn
(Whirling Water)
Nḛhḛ (Shattering
Water)
Yʉ’ka ([Beetle]
Slick)

César

Rosa China

1950

Okai

Rosa China

1950

César

Rosa China

1950

Kɒ’tió̰hḛkn
(Cacique Bird’s
Bathing Spot)

?

?

?

597

598

Appendix 5. Primary Keys of Andoque Dream Interpretation
The primary keys to Andoque dream interpretation theory, which sometimes overlap, include
perspectivism, mythical origin, metonymy, formal resemblance, homology of effects, and direct
representation. These are briefly examined in the following pages.
The first key for dream interpretation is perspectivist inversions, in line with Viveiros de Castro’s (1998)
definition of perspectivism and multinaturalism. According to the Andoque, when asleep, the dreamer
enters the same state as spirit masters, animals, and the deceased, who lack a proper human body.
Detached from their usual physical form, the dreamer’s spirit roams the world, perceiving it as these
beings do. This perspectival shift leads to a different view of the world compared to that of awake
humans. The attributes and actions of the people seen in dreams represent those of animals and their
spirit masters, while the attributes and actions of animals represent those of human beings.
Consequently, after dreaming of aggression from animals, one should be wary of potential aggression
from people, and if one dreams of being physically assaulted by humans, it is advisable to avoid
wandering alone in the forest. As human beings can be both predators and prey, the animal species
representing a person in a dream largely depends on the function of that person in the dream: a person in
a spiritually vulnerable state might be symbolized by a game animal (e.g., tapir), whereas a sorcerer
could be symbolized by a jaguar or anaconda due to his spiritual aggressiveness. Kohn’s argument for
the Runa, wherein an agent whose spirit has been devoured in a dream becomes defenseless and, as
such, is an easy prey in the physical world, supports this notion (Kohn 2013, 141).
As for dreams with human signifiers, dreams containing commensality or sexual relations with people,
regardless of their personal identities, are perceived as predicting disease, which is conceived as a state
of consubstantiality with nonhuman entities (see Chapter 9). Conversely, dreaming of refusing sexual
advances or encountering people who disregard the dreamer’s existence can foretell a successful hunt.
Dreaming of participating in a ceremonial dance foretells future grief, and my interlocutors explained it
to me through a logic of inversion in emotions, where joy, for example, predicts sorrow. Nevertheless, I
propose that this interpretation aligns with the perspectival key as well. Ceremonial dances ideally
articulate the concerted agency of the human community to enhance social reproduction, often at the
expense of faunal lives. Conversely, if animal spirits perform a dance in a dream, it suggests a
forthcoming increase in the faunal population—at the potential cost of human lives.

599

However, in some dreams, that carry a more direct message, a person can stand for themselves.
Dreaming of a person who, in reality, is known to be found far away, means that that person has recalled
of the dreamer. Although the spirits of the deceased usually appear in dreams as animals, those who died
a good death and were not devoured by malevolent animal spirits appear as themselves. Tellingly, the
only example I have of such appearances is of Yiñékɒ. Many people reported to Roberto Pineda soon
after Yiñékɒ’s death in 1984 that they had dreamed of him, receiving different messages (Roberto
Pineda Camacho, Pers. Comm., March 2019). This also happens in dreams on living people, and I was
told that the stronger one’s spirit is, the more straightforward and less covert their dream figures will be.
Although the small number of dream narratives of this class that I have collected precludes decisive
conclusions, it seems that living people usually appear as themselves in dreams insofar as they are the
victims of only mild malaise, but not in cases where they are the aggressors or when falling prey to
serious attacks; an event within the predatory framework will be reflected by a dream with a perspectival
logic. Tellingly, only the powerful Yiñékɒ is reported to have dreamed of a malevolent sorcerer in
search of prey, appearing in human figure and not disguised as an animal (although the human figure in
the dream was not in the form of that specific sorcerer).
Animals can also be represented by cultivated fruits, which, in line with the perspectival code, is the way
in which they are perceived by their spirit masters (Pineda Camacho 1982, 39; see García 2018, 258–60
for a Murui-Muina equivalent). The same game species can be represented both ways, with the idea that
the specimens represented by fruits are safer to eat than those represented by people, whose meat can be
contaminated by their malevolent agency and cause undesired effects.
The index determining which fruit represents which animal overlaps with the second key of dream
interpretation, which is mythical origin. This is the register most suitable for bodiless communication, as
mythology tells of a time and a plane of reality where physical differentiation did not or does not exist.
However, signification on this register can work in two ways. In the first case, the signifier in the dream
is the original thing or agent, and the signified—its derivative. For example, felling trees represents war,
because trees’ mythical origin is in inimical anaconda warriors. In the second case, the signified is the
original thing or agent, and the signifier is its derivative. For example, dreaming about atta ants (Atta
sp.), which originated from a jaguar’s blood drops, presages blood, while umari fruits (Poraqueiba
sericea) signify tapirs, who was this fruit’s first mythical owner-person. In this two-way signification,
either the original object or its derivative can be metonymical for the other.

600

Metonymy figures as the third interpretive key, even in cases that do not involve mythical origin, and
where the dream object is metonymical to the symbolized state. For example, dreaming of the sun or
moon foretells death, as a state in which, lying on their back, the dead “see” the sun or moon above
them, whereas consuming coca in a dream predicts loss of teeth owing to the idea that chewing coca
makes the chewer age faster, as well as to the incompatibility of coca and teeth in regional thinking
(Karadimas 2005b, 160–70).
The fourth key is formal resemblance, which is similar to metonymy in that, lacking the corporal gear
for normal perception, the dreamer perceives things in a distorted way: a penis in a dream warns of a
snake;228 the round and hard forest fruits of the açaí (Euterpe oleracea) and patawa (Oenocarpus bataua)
palms, when seen in a dream as they are spread on the ground, symbolize gun bullets, and the juicy
Pourouma cecropiifolia grapes portend the shedding of tears.
The fifth key is homology of effects: dreaming of carrying a baby on the arms predicts being stung by a
bullet ant’s (Paraponera clavata), which usually attacks the arms, whereas dreaming of chili represents
other “hot,” “mouth-burning” things: the gossip and slander told about the dreamer. This category is
especially important for our discussion on spiritual power, as I also subsume under it dreams in which
the effects experienced by a physical signifier stand for homologous effects in the realm of mental and
spiritual integrity. For example, dreaming of building a house or completing any manual work
symbolizes the dreamer’s strong spirit and faith in their origin and mental capabilities. The opposite can
be said of a dream where one loses one’s way in the forest (confused thinking, one is not guided by
one’s origin) or where one’s flashlight goes out (one’s thinking weakens and achieving spiritual tasks
such as healing becomes less probable). Such dreams also reflect the territorialized aspect of thinking:
dreaming of a visit to the Site of Tears encourages the dreamer to follow their spiritual path, as it
validates its conformity with their ancestors’ spiritual path. On the other hand, dreaming of visiting
another Indigenous territory, let alone the city, represents a dangerous digression from one’s proper
principles and a spiritual confusion leaving the person exposed to different misfortunes and, ultimately,
death. Death can be represented by a dream where the dreamer is trapped inside a room in a city or
embarking on a plane.

In line with Descola’s observation, and along with the abovementioned dreams of sexual relations that portend illness, this
is another example of the gap between Freudian dream interpretation and Amazonian ones, “wherein sexuality plays only a
minor role, and indeed figures more often as a signifier than the signified” (Descola 1989, 448).

228

601

602

Appendix 6. Résumé détaillé de la thèse
Introduction (complète)
C’est grâce aux poissons morts quittant le secteur d’Araracuara que les gens vivants peuvent y entrer. Suite à la
cessation des vols vers et depuis ce village situé sur le fleuve du Moyen Caquetá par la compagnie aérienne
gouvernementale Satena, les vols hebdomadaires de fret des marchands arrivant vides de San José del Guaviare à
la recherche de poissons congelés pour satisfaire l’appétit des citadins de Bogotá sont restés le seul moyen de s’y
rendre depuis cette ville, qui relie l’Amazonie colombienne à la cordillère des Andes par voie terrestre. C’est lors
d’un de ces vols que j’ai atterri pour la première fois à Araracuara un matin d’avril 2018, un ajout particulier à un
ensemble déjà hétéroclite : deux employés colombiens des Parcs Nationaux Naturels, une missionnaire espagnole,
une touriste allemande, un employé britannique d’une organisation des droits humains, et plusieurs individus
Murui-Muina résidant à Bogotá et rendant visite à leurs communautés d’origine dont ils avaient fui en raison de la
menace des groupes dissidents armés. Alors que les soldats inspectaient mon passeport, se demandant à haute
voix ce qui avait pu amener un Israélien à Araracuara, et que j’inspectais la foule autochtone se rassemblant à
distance pour accueillir les nouveaux arrivants, l’employée supérieure de l’agence des Parcs Nationaux Naturels
(Parques Nacionales Naturales ; désormais Parques), ayant entendu ma volonté de mener une enquête
ethnographique auprès du peuple andoque, m’a cyniquement souhaité bonne chance, en disant : « Ils sont très
hostiles, ils ont cette réputation de toujours refuser tout et de ne collaborer avec personne ; tout ce à quoi ils
pensent, c’est à l’argent. Savez-vous qu’ils exploitaient même de l’or ? »
Une fois accueilli et pris en charge par mes contacts du Clan Fourmi Atta des Andoque, je me suis rendu compte
que mes nouveaux hôtes n’étaient pas aussi horribles qu’ils étaient décrits. Cependant, deux jours plus tard, j’ai
été témoin de l’hostilité à laquelle l’employée de Parques faisait référence, dirigée contre son collègue junior lors
d’une assemblée à la maloca (maison résidentielle et cérémonielle) de Mario Andoke, du Clan Cerf. Ce
représentant junior a tenté en vain de parvenir à des décisions pratiques conjointes concernant l’équipe, la
méthodologie, le budget pour le côté logistique et le calendrier d’un atelier visant à formuler un « plan culturel
pour la gestion territoriale » que les Andoque avaient précédemment demandé à Parques de soutenir. Pendant
l’assemblée, plusieurs participants ont accusé l’agence de ne pas avoir fourni le soutien requis pour l’expansion
territoriale de leur réserve tel qu’accepté, tandis que le Parc National Naturel voisin de Chiribiquete avait doublé
de taille pendant cette période. Alors que certains ont vainement tenté de convaincre le représentant de Parques
d’essayer la poudre de coca qu’ils avaient préparée pour la réunion, d’autres ont vivement critiqué son
organisation, remettant en question le droit de Parques à intervenir dans la gestion territoriale des Andoque. Levy
Andoke, membre de la réserve diplômé universitaire, entrepreneur et homme politique régional résidant à Bogotá,
a utilisé un jargon juridique complexe largement incompréhensible pour bon nombre de ses proches et autres
participants autochtones. Il a soutenu que de tels plans supposent que les peuples autochtones sont des « Indiens

603

traditionnels » qui ne veulent que la préservation de la forêt et s’opposent au développement par souci écologique,
tout en ignorant leurs difficultés économiques actuelles. La plupart des autres participants andoque étaient prêts à
collaborer avec Parques uniquement s’ils étaient payés pour la préservation et exigeaient des salaires élevés pour
les aînés, dont les connaissances sur le territoire et le maintien des relations avec ses cohabitants non-humains
contribueraient à la formulation du document. Après avoir déclaré que Parques considérait les peuples
autochtones comme des alliés, le représentant a finalement admis que pour son organisation, la préservation était
la fin, et les peuples autochtones étaient le moyen. « Les Blancs ne donnent des droits qu’aux arbres, pas aux
gens », s’est plaint un participant pendant une pause. « Ils veulent que nous vivions comme les Indiens de
l’Apaporis : nus, pieds nus, mais heureux, mais nous avons des besoins ! » a dit un autre, faisant référence à des
groupes autochtones qui incarnent les « Indiens purs » pour les Andoque et sont considérés comme les protégés
de Parques et de l’organisation non-gouvernementale Gaia Amazonas. Les participants ont gonflé le budget pour
la logistique et ont insisté : « Nous avons des besoins ; comme Parques, un Andoque ne travaille que pour de
l’argent. » En conséquence, la réunion n’a pas atteint ses objectifs.
De mon côté, je suis sorti de la réunion avec le moral au beau fixe, ayant saisi l’occasion de me présenter aux
membres de la réserve, en particulier aux aînés et aux jeunes leaders, et d’obtenir leur consentement pour rester
avec eux et mener mon enquête. Ma présentation a été suivie de celles des aînés, qui occupaient des sièges au
mambeadero—l’espace où la poudre de coca est préparée et consommée dans les après-midis et soirées—tandis
que d’autres hommes étaient assis sur des bancs à leur droite et à leur gauche, et que les femmes participantes
observaient depuis l’arrière de la maloca. Fisi (« Bord de la roche ») du Clan Aigle a été le premier à se présenter,
se référant à lui-même en tant que cacique (capitaine au-dessus du niveau du clan), et a été suivi par les cinq
capitaines des clans. Après leurs présentations, un silence est tombé, comme si tout le monde attendait que
quelqu’un d’autre parle. « Et toi, Milciades ? », quelqu’un s’est adressé au père de Levy assis sur un banc à droite
de l’entrée. « Et moi ? » dit Milciades, également connu sous son nom autochtone Tañe (« Soleil immobile »).
« Je ne suis pas un capitaine, et je n’ai plus de maloca. » Cependant, cela n’a pas empêché Tañe de me dire plus
tard, lorsque j’ai commenté la grandeur imposante de la maloca de Mario, que sa propre maloca était encore plus
grande. Avant de revenir à la discussion avec le représentant de Parques, les participants ont demandé avec qui
j’avais l’intention de travailler. J’ai réussi à esquiver la question pour le moment en déclarant que j’espérais
d’abord apprendre à connaître autant de membres que possible en restant deux semaines dans le hameau de
chaque clan. Les participants ont approuvé cette idée et ont décidé d’un calendrier pour mes visites à chaque clan.
Cependant, un aîné s’est approché discrètement de moi plus tard, exprimant que si je souhaitais travailler avec lui,
il ne serait pas d’accord pour que je travaille avec aucun autre aîné. Désarçonné mais légèrement, j’étais tout de
même heureux d’avoir survécu ma première assemblée communautaire.

604

Ainsi, à peine deux jours après le début de mon travail sur le terrain avec les Andoque, il était impossible
d’ignorer les multiples tensions imprégnant cette petite société autochtone. Ces tensions étaient omniprésentes :
dans les interactions tendues avec les représentants de l’État et des organisations environnementales, marquées
par la position méfiante et combative adoptée par les Andoque ; dans la compétition constante pour le prestige et
le savoir entre les aînés ; dans la disparité perceptible dans l’accès aux ressources externes entre Levy et les autres
membres—et par extension, entre son clan et les autres clans ; dans le rôle marginalisé des femmes dans de telles
assemblées, par rapport aux hommes ; et enfin, il existait une peur, une compétition ou une animosité
profondément enracinée envers les animaux et autres entités non-humaines habitant la forêt et le fleuve—un
sentiment sous-jacent dont je ne pouvais pas encore saisir le sens, mais qui jouait un rôle important en tant que
toile de fond essentielle pour les autres tensions.
Cette thèse explore ainsi la question suivante : Comment les conceptions de pouvoir sont-elles façonnées et
négociées, et comment les dynamiques de pouvoir se manifestent-elles à travers trois types d’imbrication 1) au
sein de la population autochtone, 2) entre les Andoque et les cohabitants non-humains de leur territoire, et 3) entre
eux et les agents non-autochtones ? Comme je le démontrerai tout au long de cette thèse, le pouvoir se manifeste
dans la capacité à la fois des agents humains et non-humains à transformer leurs relations d’échanges symétriques
en relations asymétriques à travers divers contextes, un effort ancré dans les conceptions autochtones de parenté et
d’espace. Le pouvoir provient de et facilite la transformation de parents affins potentiellement dangereux en
parents consanguins plus bienveillants. Il est profondément ancré dans les perceptions spatiales qui interprètent
les dynamiques prédatrices au sein d’un cosmos axé le long du cours d’un fleuve, englobant la source du fleuve,
le centre et l’embouchure. Ce cadre spatial intègre également les trajectoires historiques du commerce colonial, de
l’exploitation des ressources naturelles et, finalement, des efforts de préservation, où les échanges asymétriques
entre les Andoque et les agents non-autochtones redéfinissent les dynamiques de pouvoir entre ces derniers et les
entités non-humaines de leur environnement.
Les Andoque et leur territoire
Des données officielles fixent la population totale au sein des deux réserves andoque en juin 2018 à 343 individus
(Ministerio del Interior 2020). Ce nombre inclut, outre les résidents des réserves andoque, des habitants nonandoque ainsi que certains émigrants andoque vivant dans d’autres réserves autochtones et villes colombiennes,
principalement à Bogotá et Leticia. Une enquête que j’ai menée à mon arrivée en avril 2018 a montré que la
population andoque vivant sur leur territoire ancestral s’élevait à 176 individus, avec une estimation de 83
individus andoque vivant à l’extérieur du territoire, et 92 individus non-andoque qui sont membres des réserves
andoque. Cette population non-andoque représente des colons et des membres d’autres peuples autochtones qui se
sont mariés au sein du réseau de parenté andoque ou vivent dans leurs réserves en tant que résidents invités. En
général, la population andoque est intégrée dans des réseaux plus larges d’alliance et de coexistence avec des

605

membres d’autres peuples autochtones et non-autochtones dans le secteur plus vaste d’Araracuara. Ils
maintiennent également des relations d’échange, qui varient en intensité, avec les émigrants andoque. Cette
recherche se concentre principalement sur l’expérience, les perspectives et les souvenirs des individus andoque
vivant sur leur territoire ancestral. Toutefois, elle aborde occasionnellement les expériences des émigrants ou des
conjoints non-andoque des individus andoque dans la mesure où leurs expériences sont pertinentes pour les
thèmes discutés dans cette thèse.
Les Andoque font partie du complexe culturel plus large des peuples autochtones vivant dans l’interfluve
Caquetá-Putumayo et s’identifiant comme les « Peuples du Centre », aux côtés des Féénemɨna (ou Muinane),
Bora, Miraña, Nonuya, Ocaina, et des peuples parlant des dialectes Murui-Muina (Nɨpóde, Bue et Mɨnɨka),
précédemment connus sous le nom d’Uitoto. Contrairement à ces voisins, dont les langues se répartissent en deux
familles linguistiques, les Andoque parlent une langue isolée. Le nom « Andoque » est un exonyme d’origine
Murui-Muina (Adokɨ), signifiant soit « Peuple de la Hache » (Thomas Griffiths, comm. pers., octobre 2021), soit
« Peuple de l’Amont » ou « de la Montagne » (Landaburu 1979, 13 n.1 ; Echeverri 2022, 35 n.5). L’endonyme
Pɵɵ Síɵ́hɵ concorde avec la première interprétation, faisant allusion aux haches de pierre que les Andoque
trouvaient dans des dépôts souterrains sur leur territoire et échangeaient avec les peuples voisins avant l’arrivée
des personnes non-autochtones avec leurs outils métalliques.
Le territoire ancestral des Andoque englobe les terres au sud du fleuve Tapir (Ḭtɵse, ou le Caquetá), s’étendant du
fleuve Frayer (Ḭ ́’pá̰se, communément appelé fleuve Monochoa) à l’ouest au fleuve Dessin (Hḭ’ḭse, également
appelé fleuve Quinche) à l’est, et au fleuve Vert (Pasḭse, également désigné sous le nom de fleuve Cahuinarí) au
sud. Au nord du Caquetá, il couvre la zone encadrée entre le fleuve Feuille de Plantain (Kɒ́’kɒpuse) et le fleuve
Psarocolius (Kɒtise), situé à l’est du fleuve Loutre (Oédise, communément appelé fleuve Yarí), ainsi que la zone
s’étendant entre le fleuve Sel (Ñɒ’Kɒse) et le Caquetá.
La population andoque habite actuellement deux réserves autochtones établies sur ce territoire : 1) la réserve
autochtone Andoque de Aduche située sur la rive nord du Caquetá, qui s’étend sur une superficie de 188 466,17
hectares (après son expansion en décembre 2020 ; Résolution 033/1988, Accord 030/2004, Accord 140/2020), et
2) la « Zone de Gestion Spéciale » Andoque de Aduche au sein de la réserve autochtone pluri-ethnique Predio
Putumayo, couvrant une superficie d’environ 211 180 hectares au sud du Caquetá et centrée autour du fleuve Ara
Macao (Áduse) (Résolutions 030/1988 et 057/1989).
Les indicateurs climatiques et botaniques du territoire ancestral des Andoque correspondent à la définition de la
forêt tropicale humide (Holdridge et al., 1971, p. 43). Les précipitations annuelles varient entre 3 000 et 4 000
mm, avec un pourcentage élevé de précipitations pendant la saison des pluies d’avril à juillet, et la saison sèche
atteignant son pic entre décembre et février. Les températures oscillent entre 24 et 26°C, et l’humidité relative se

606

situe entre 85 et 90 % (IDEAM 2010). Le territoire est situé à une altitude d’environ 150 à 300 mètres au-dessus
du niveau de la mer et se compose de quatre principales unités géomorphiques : la plaine d’inondation du fleuve
Caquetá, un fleuve d’eau blanche ; la plaine d’inondation des rivières d’origine amazonienne aux eaux claires et
noires, qui représentent tous les autres cours d’eau et rivières du moyen Caquetá ; la plaine sédimentaire tertiaire ;
et les formations de roches dures, constituées principalement de plateaux de grès paléozoïque (Duivenvoorden et
Lips, 1993, p. 150). Chaque zone abrite des types de sols distincts et des communautés végétales : végétation
riparienne et forêt de marais à palmiers dans la plaine alluviale du Caquetá ; forêt de terra firme haute et à forte
biomasse parsemée de salines et de marais à palmiers dans la plaine sédimentaire tertiaire, et forêt basse et dense,
caatinga et végétation de savane sur le plateau de grès (Griffiths, 1998, p. 25-26).
Comme d’autres Peuples du Centre, la société andoque est composée de clans patrilinéaires. Actuellement, les
membres andoque appartiennent à huit clans—Aigle, Soleil, Cerf, Fourmi Atta, Coléoptère, Pénélope de Spix,
Mauritia, et Anaconda—parmi lesquels seuls les cinq premiers sont considérés viables, les autres incluant
uniquement des femmes ou des hommes sans enfant. Avant l’esclavage, les atrocités et le génocide commis par
les agents de la Compagnie du Caoutchouc de l’Amazonie Péruvienne (ou Casa Arana) au début du XXe siècle, la
population andoque était estimée à 10 000 individus (Whiffen 1915, 59), et lors de nos conversations, les anciens
andoque ont mentionné jusqu’à 35 clans de cette époque.
Similaire aux autres Peuples du Centre, la terminologie de la parenté chez les Andoque présente des similitudes
avec les types Eskimo et Hawaïen (Karadimas 2000b ; Londoño Sulkin 2012, 160–67 ; Lucas 2019, 163–65).
Comme dans le système Eskimo, les Andoque distinguent entre les parents et leurs frères et sœurs mais pas entre
les parents patrilatéraux et matrilatéraux. De plus, comme dans le système Hawaïen, ils emploient des termes
différents pour les vrais frères et sœurs et pour les parents classificatoires (cousins), bien que les termes pour ces
derniers représentent une variation des termes pour les premiers (par exemple, ḭ́ ekó ’ɵɵ pour un cousin du même
sexe, signifiant « pauvre frère »). Typique du Caquetá-Putumayo, la parenté Andoque diffère du type dravidien
prédominant dans toute l’Amérique du Sud de basse altitude, ce qui implique également l’absence de règles de
mariage prescriptives et justifie leur considération en tant que société semi-complexe qui, en apparence, ne
contient que des règles de mariage négatives de ne pas se marier avec des parents. Cependant, les données
montrent une tendance à se marier immédiatement au-delà du cercle des relations incestueuses et à renouveler
ainsi l’alliance endogame après plusieurs générations (Gasché 1976 ; Karadimas 2000b ; Lucas 2019, 158–63).
La résidence est patrilocale, et un mari peut passer une période d’un an ou plus à servir sa femme chez la famille
de celle-ci—un idéal qui se concrétise rarement aujourd’hui en pratique. Les membres andoque vivent le plus
souvent dans des maisons sur pilotis de type familial nucléaire dans des hameaux correspondant à la descendance
patrilinéaire, composés de plusieurs frères, de leurs épouses (qui sont, pour la plupart, non-andoque) et de leurs
enfants. Peu de familles vivent dans des malocas—de grandes maisons qui abritaient autrefois des lignées entières

607

et du personnel adjoint et qui fonctionnaient comme des unités économiques, politiques et cérémonielles—et
d’autres utilisent leurs malocas pour la cuisine, la préparation de coca dans le mambeadero et les activités
générales tout au long de la journée, tout en dormant dans des maisons adjacentes. Les malocas andoque
accueillent des réunions avec des étrangers, comme dans la scène d’introduction, et elles—ou de petites
maloquitas abritant les espaces mambeadero des hommes—servent de centres sociaux des hameaux dans lesquels
elles se trouvent. Les membres andoque résident dans sept hameaux (veredas) le long des fleuves Caquetá et Ara
Macao, ainsi que dans la grande agglomération pluriethnique d’Araracuara dans la réserve autochtone Andoque
de Aduche sur la rive nord du fleuve Caquetá. De plus, plusieurs familles andoque vivent dans le village de colons
de statut de corregimiento, Puerto Santander, qui fait face à Araracuara sur la rive sud du fleuve Caquetá. Ce
village est construit sur le territoire ancestral des Andoque mais n’est pas considéré comme faisant partie de la
réserve autochtone Predio Putumayo.
Les pratiques rituelles et quotidiennes des Andoque, leurs principes cosmologiques, ainsi que leurs façons de
connaître et d’interagir avec les plantes et les animaux permettent de les classifier largement comme « animistes »
selon le système de quatre modes d’identification ou régimes ontologiques de Philippe Descola (2005). Selon sa
définition, les membres des collectifs animistes tendent à percevoir des similarités entre eux-mêmes et toutes les
entités de leur environnement sur le plan de l’intériorité (subjectivité, agentivité, états mentaux et émotionnels,
normes sociales, etc.), tout en reconnaissant des dissimilarités sur le plan de la physicalité (formes et principes
corporels, ainsi que manifestations externes). Ce mode d’identification est diamétralement opposé aux
dispositions « naturalistes » occidentales modernes, qui reconnaissent des similarités entre toutes les entités sur le
plan de la physicalité tout en les niant dans le domaine de l’intériorité. Il n’existe pas d’équivalent dans la langue
andoque au mot français (et espagnol) « animal » pour désigner tous les êtres fauniques sauf les humains. Bei est
le terme général pour les poissons, qui sont également classés parmi les dú’u ño̰ḛ (« personnes aquatiques ») avec
les reptiles (comme les tortues de rivière arrau et les caïmans) et les dauphins. Hiɵfo est le terme général pour les
oiseaux, tandis que ḭsu classe tous les animaux terrestres ressemblant aux humains dans leur habitat au-dessus du
sol. Cette catégorie inclut à la fois les animaux de chasse tels que le tapir et les prédateurs comme le jaguar, ainsi
que les singes (qui sont également doɨsua, « animaux d’en haut »), le tatou et la tortue terrestre (qui sont
également yakafi síɵ́hɵ, « ceux qui sont blindés »). Elle exclut les oiseaux terrestres (ñó̰ʼifoa, « oiseaux
terrestres »), les serpents (na̰yuni síɵ́hɵ, « mordeurs »), et les vers de terre et autres animaux vivant sous terre
(ñó̰ʼiño̰ḛ, « personnes de terre »). Concurrent avec les humains pour l’espace et les ressources, les membres de la
catégorie des ḭsu sont, collectivement, l’objet de conjectures plus élaborées concernant leurs traits culturels, leurs
normes sociales et leurs institutions, qui reflètent ceux des humains.
De manière similaire aux autres Peuples du Centre, les Andoque subsistent sur l’horticulture itinérante et la
culture des plantes clés telles que le manioc amer, la coca et le tabac, ainsi que la chasse et la pêche. Ils se

608

distinguent des autres peuples autochtones amazoniens en consommant de la poudre de coca (une pratique
partagée uniquement avec les groupes tucanoan et arawakan des fleuves Vaupés-Bas Caquetá), en préparant le
tabac sous forme de pâte ou de liquide (contrairement à ces groupes et à d’autres dans leur environnement), en ne
possédant pas de boissons alcoolisées autochtones et en élaborant la boisson de la manicuera à partir d’une variété
de manioc toxique (Echeverri 2022, 35–36). Un autre aspect significatif de leur moyen de subsistance est la
participation à l’économie monétaire régionale. Cette participation comprend occasionnellement du travail salarié
et tourne principalement autour de la vente des récoltes locales et des produits aux colons et aux commerçants. La
population autochtone de la région a participé au commerce avec des agents non-autochtones et leurs
intermédiaires autochtones en aval (l’actuel Brésil) depuis le XVIIe siècle (Pineda Camacho 1985) et a participé à
toutes les ruées économiques de la région, principalement dirigées par des agents non-autochtones. Le premier
essor économique documenté dans la région a été le commerce d’esclaves, s’étendant aussi loin que le XVIIe
siècle jusqu’à ce qu’il soit supplanté par l’exploitation du caoutchouc au tournant du XXe siècle. La population
autochtone a d’abord extrait le caoutchouc pour des patrons colombiens, puis sous la Casa Arana, qui a employé
des pratiques génocidaires jusqu’à son départ de la région dans les années 1930. Cette activité a toutefois continué
dans des conditions plus humaines jusqu’à ce qu’elle prenne fin définitivement dans les années 1990. Son déclin,
commençant dans les années 1970, a entraîné la participation des autochtones à l’essor de la fourrure animale des
années 1970, à la pêche commerciale à partir de cette décennie, à la production de cocaïne dans les années 1980 et
à l’exploitation aurifère dans les années 2000. La prolifération des projets environnementaux à partir des années
1990, avec la participation des Andoque, représente un autre essor économique régional. Cela comprend les
accords de compensation carbone qui ont décollé dans les années 2020 après la conclusion de mon travail de
terrain.
La participation à l’économie extractive régionale s’inscrit dans un processus plus large au cours des dernières
décennies, où les Andoque se rapprochent de la société nationale. En 1938, suite à l’expulsion des troupes
péruviennes et des patrons du caoutchouc par la Colombie, l’État a fondé la Colonie pénale d’Araracuara sur la
rive nord du Caquetá, qui a servi de catalyseur pour le développement du village de colons de Puerto Santander.
Au cours de cette décennie, des pères capucins catalano-espagnols ont fondé des internats (aussi appelés «
orphelinats ») à La Chorrera et à La Pedrera, avec un petit nombre de jeunes Andoque ayant fréquenté ce dernier.
Une scolarisation plus substantielle a commencé avec la fondation de l’école missionnaire à Araracuara dans les
années 1970 (initialement située à Puerto Santander), qui interdisait l’usage des langues autochtones. Plus tard,
des écoles communautaires appliquant des principes pédagogiques bilingues ont été créées après la Constitution
de 1991, qui reconnaissait la diversité ethnique et culturelle de la Colombie. Malgré la disponibilité de l’éducation
bilingue, l’effet combiné de la scolarisation, de la présence continue de colons sur le territoire andoque et des
mariages avec des non-Andoque a entraîné le déclin de leur langue native chez les personnes de moins de 50 ans
et la montée de l’espagnol.

609

La recherche précédente sur les Andoque et leurs voisins
Les Peuples du Centre se distinguent dans le paysage autochtone amazonien en raison de certains des processus
historiques et des traits ethnographiques mentionnés précédemment. Le premier processus est le génocide lié au
caoutchouc. De nombreuses populations autochtones à travers l’Amazonie ont subi une exploitation sévère, du
travail forcé et des abus brutaux, souvent mortels, de la part des barons du caoutchouc et des extracteurs lors des
deux essors du caoutchouc des années 1870 aux années 1940. Cependant, les pratiques génocidaires et le règne de
la terreur de la Casa Arana dans la sous-région Caquetá-Putumayo étaient particulièrement destructeurs (Nugent
2018, 13), menant à l’annihilation complète de certains groupes autochtones, à un déclin drastique de tous les
autres, y compris les Andoque, et au déplacement de populations entières (Pineda Camacho 2000). Les sociétés
qui ont reconstitué et revitalisé leurs cultures après l’expulsion des agents et des troupes du Pérou maintiennent
néanmoins une perception marquée de déconnexion avec leurs histoires pré-génocide (Echeverri 2010). Pourtant,
beaucoup parmi les Peuples du Centre, y compris les Andoque, ont continué à extraire du caoutchouc après le
génocide, travaillant parfois avec d’anciens employés de la Casa Arana, dont les descendants, tels que les
marchands de poissons opérant les vols vers le secteur d’Araracuara, ont encore un impact considérable sur les
économies locales et les sociétés de la sous-région Caquetá-Putumayo.
Une deuxième particularité concerne la parenté. Contrairement à l’absence typique de caractéristiques unilinéales
à travers l’Amazonie ou leur non-combinaison avec une emphase idéologique sur les principes de descendance (S.
Hugh-Jones 1993, 95-96), les identités claniques patrilinéaires des Peuples du Centre et les schémas de résidence
patrilocale se combinent avec une idéologie agnatique qui va à l’encontre d’un principe cognatique, où ils
considèrent comme parents les individus reliés à eux à la fois par leur côté maternel et paternel. L’emphase mis
sur l’agnation est crucial pour comprendre la forme particulière que prenait l’esclavage—une pratique
amazonienne autochtone désormais reconnue remontant à l’ère précolombienne et également pertinente dans des
contextes extra-coloniaux (Santos Granero 2009b)—parmi les Peuples du Centre avant d’être supplanté par
l’exploitation du caoutchouc. Alors que le principal mécanisme de production d’esclaves en Amazonie
autochtone, que ce soit pour le service domestique ou le commerce avec des agents non-autochtones, était la
capture d’individus lors de raids (ibid.), dans l’histoire des Peuples du Centre, c’était le principe même de la
descendance agnatique qui produisait des esclaves—ou, en termes locaux, des « orphelins ». Il s’agissait
d’individus qui, lors de périodes de guerre et d’épidémies dévastatrices entraînant l’extinction de populations
entières, trouvaient refuge dans les malocas de leurs parents affinaux ou matrilatéraux, ou étaient ceux qui
déménageaient dans les malocas de leurs conjoints après le mariage. Ne faisant pas partie du clan de leur nouveau
chef, ils occupaient un statut inférieur et servile par rapport à ce dernier et à ses membres de clan, et pouvaient
éventuellement être échangés comme esclaves contre des biens manufacturés externes (Echeverri 2022;
Karadimas 2001; Lucas 2021).

610

Une autre caractéristique des Peuples du Centre, étroitement liée à leur idéologie agnatique, est le statut spécial
qu’ils accordent à la mythologie et à la diffusion ésotérique des mythes clés au sein de la population.
Contrairement à certaines sociétés amazoniennes, telles que les Achuar, où la connaissance de la mythologie est
en principe ouverte à tous mais suscite généralement peu d’intérêt ou est minimisée par rapport aux formes
expressives ritualisées qui s’en inspirent néanmoins (Descola 1986, 239, 248), les Peuples du Centre tiennent les
récits mythiques en haute estime et restreignent leur connaissance à leurs clans respectifs ou à d’autres parents
ayant prouvé leur engagement et leur discrétion. Ce point est particulièrement important pour les mythes d’origine
des clans, qui servent, dans une certaine mesure, de principes totémiques pour leurs membres respectifs—ces
derniers s’en remettant à eux pour trouver de l’aide et de l’inspiration en période de crise—ainsi que pour toute
autre histoire racontant l’origine de pratiques spécifiques, telles que la construction de malocas, la préparation de
la coca, l’organisation des danses et l’accomplissement de guérisons et d’incantations (Londoño Sulkin 2000,
329–30). Ces récits servent de charte, non pas au sens strictement malinowskien (1926) d’affirmation ou de
contestation des droits territoriaux et des revendications de statut et de prérogatives rituelles, comme dans les
récits d’origine des groupes tucanoans du fleuve Vaupés (S. Hugh-Jones 2019b), mais au sens de l’adaptation par
Pierre-Yves Jacopin (2010) du terme à la mythologie plus large de la région, en ce que ces mythes canalisent
l’agentivité d’un épisode à l’autre jusqu’à ce que le dernier épisode la délègue à l’humanité d’aujourd’hui—le
narrateur et les auditeurs qui sont maintenant en mesure de rejouer les exploits mythiques. De la même manière
que l’économie politique de la connaissance tucanoane décrite par Stephen Hugh-Jones (2010; 2019b), parmi les
clans patrilinéaires concurrents des Peuples du Centre, le pouvoir investi dans les mythes conduit à leur
transmission préférentielle au sein du clan.
La mythologie, la vie rituelle et les pratiques des Peuples du Centre habitant le Moyen Caquetá ont été
documentées par des chercheurs et des explorateurs dès la première moitié du XIXe siècle, avec des références et
des observations dispersées concernant les Andoque (Spix et Martius 1981 [1823] ; Crévaux 1883; Robuchon
2010 [1907] ; Whiffen 1915 ; Tessmann 1999 ; Preuss 1994). Les recherches consacrées aux Andoque ont
commencé avec l’étude linguistique menée par Jon Landaburu (1979), qui a introduit les jeunes anthropologues
Roberto Pineda Camacho et Manuel Antonio Guzmán à la communauté andoque. Guzmán a rédigé son mémoire
de licence sur leur organisation sociale et leur participation à l’économie du caoutchouc dans les années 1970
(Guzmán Gonzalez 1971), et Pineda a collaboré avec Landaburu à une anthologie magistrale et un commentaire
sur la mythologie andoque (Landaburu et Pineda 1981; Landaburu et Pineda 1984), en plus de publier des travaux
solitaires sur l’histoire des Andoque, leur économie, leur adoption de technologies étrangères (principalement la
hache en métal) et la manière dont toutes ces dimensions de leur monde vécu sont représentées dans le mythe et le
rituel (Pineda Camacho 1975; 1979; 2014). Les travaux perspicaces et méticuleux de Pineda et Landaburu sur les
Andoque, ainsi que les études ultérieures de Pineda sur l’histoire de la Casa Arana et de la sous-région du Caquetá
(Pineda Camacho et Llanos 1982; Pineda Camacho 2000; 1985), demeurent des ressources bibliographiques

611

incontournables pour comprendre la société andoque, et je les ai largement utilisés pour compléter mes propres
données sur la cosmologie et acquérir une perspective comparative sur la narration des mythes à travers des
contextes historiques.
Landaburu et Pineda représentent une génération de chercheurs qui ont inauguré la recherche anthropologique
scientifique sur les Peuples du Centre entre les années 1960 et 1980, aux côtés de Jürg Gasché, Mireille Guyot,
Horacio Calle et Jean Patrick Razon. Ils se sont engagés dans la documentation de sauvetage de leurs mythologies
et se sont concentrés sur les processus impressionnants de reconstruction de ces peuples suite au génocide
dévastateur et au déplacement au début du XXe siècle. Des recherches ultérieures au cours des années 1990 parmi
les Peuples du Centre ont souligné un fossé entre le discours cannibale des temps pré-génocidaires et la socialité
et la politique contemporaines de collaboration interethnique, mettant l’accent sur le discours autochtone qui
présentait les humains comme intrinsèquement supérieurs, contrairement aux êtres non-humains qui incarnent
l’immoralité. Ces recherches concernaient principalement les Murui-Muina et les Féénemɨna (Echeverri 1997 ;
Griffiths 1998 ; Londoño Sulkin 2000), bien que l’analyse de Landaburu des transformations mythologiques postgénocide des Andoque et l’insistance de Monica Espinosa Arango (1995) sur un effort communautaire andoque
pour la convivialité puissent également être considérées comme faisant partie de cette tendance irénique dans la
recherche. En revanche, les publications de Dimitri Karadimas (2005), Oscar Iván García (2018) et María Luisa
Lucas (2019) chez les Miraña, les Murui-Muina et les Bora, respectivement, mettent en avant la cosmologie
prédatrice et les tendances plus hiérarchiques encore très présentes entre les chefs et les orphelins, et enregistrent
des dynamiques de pouvoir qui sont essentielles pour la présente thèse.
Au cours des années 2000 et 2010, plusieurs étudiants en anthropologie ont réalisé des recherches de courte durée
parmi les Andoque. Nelsa de la Hoz Melo (2005) a analysé une danse cérémonielle (Tu’si, ou Arbre
Multiplicateur), du point de vue de ses hôtes du Clan Soleil, tandis que Levy Andoke Andoke (2011) de ce clan a
écrit sa thèse de premier cycle sur le processus de récupération post-génocide des Andoque, en se concentrant
principalement sur la mémoire conservée par les membres de son propre clan et par sa mère (du Clan Aigle). Lena
Yanina Estrada Añokazi (2017) a fourni dans sa thèse de doctorat un aperçu panoramique du peuple andoque,
comprenant une analyse limitée de leur perception du territoire, basée, dans une certaine mesure, sur des
interprétations par des interlocuteurs Murui-Muina. Enfin, Else Audren (2017) a rendu compte de manière habile
dans sa thèse de Master des dilemmes, des frictions internes et des aspects cosmologiques entourant l’exploitation
aurifère des Andoque et les tentatives de la légaliser en 2016, malgré la courte durée de son travail sur le terrain
cette année-là. Ces travaux m’ont fourni des détails ethnographiques supplémentaires, des versions mythiques et
des informations sur le peuple andoque au cours des dernières décennies. Cependant, aucun d’entre eux ne reflète
une description ethnographique majeure de la société andoque dans toute sa complexité en tissant ensemble la
cosmologie et l’histoire, la parenté et l’économie, le rituel et la politique. Cette thèse tente de fournir une telle

612

description en étudiant la conception et les dynamiques du pouvoir—des éléments à la fois évanescents et
transcendants les différents contextes.

Le pouvoir dans les sciences sociales et la pensée politique
Le pouvoir est l’un des concepts les plus débattus dans les sciences sociales et la pensée politique, avec des
définitions variant selon le temps, le lieu, les convictions politiques et les préoccupations méthodologiques. Pour
discuter du pouvoir en Amazonie autochtone, il est nécessaire de fournir un aperçu concis de plusieurs définitions,
distinctions et points de controverse qui ont façonné ce débat en cours, et que je discute ici dans un ordre
thématique, plutôt que dans l’ordre chronologique de leur émergence.
Le premier aspect significatif est l’observabilité du pouvoir et la sphère où il doit être recherché. Dans les
définitions conventionnelles, le pouvoir doit être visible et avoir des conséquences discernables dans des
contextes spécifiques, en particulier la prise de décision dans la sphère politique, pour être considéré en tant que
tel (par exemple, Dahl 1957). En revanche, les chercheurs critiques tendent à voir le pouvoir comme une force
cachée qui est la plus efficace lorsqu’elle est le moins observable, opérant de manière informelle et transcendant
des contextes spécifiques, sans même exiger d’action explicite (Lukes 2021, 5, 79–84). « Le secret est au cœur
même du pouvoir », a écrit Elias Canetti (1981, 290), soulignant l’asymétrie de la connaissance qui est
constitutive du pouvoir, car la personne puissante voit à travers les autres sans permettre aux autres de voir à
travers elle (ibid., 292). Mettre au jour les structures de pouvoir représente donc un acte de résistance. Ce que
Foucault considérait comme une transition historique de l’exhibition du pouvoir au pouvoir sur les individus qui
sont exhibés (1977), David Graeber l’a défini comme la coexistence simultanée de deux modalités de pouvoir
(2001, 95). D’un point de vue économique, Graeber a ensuite discuté de l’argent en tant qu’incarnant une
agentivité générique et un pouvoir dangereux précisément lorsqu’il n’est pas « apprivoisé » par des pièces qui lui
confèrent une visibilité ou affiché à travers des objets de valeur (ibid., 103).
Le deuxième aspect est la distinction, selon les termes de Steven Lukes, entre « pouvoir de » et « pouvoir sur ».
Le premier fait référence à une agentivité générale, englobant la capacité ou la facilité d’agir et d’influencer des
résultats, tandis que le second désigne une relation de domination qui est intrinsèquement sociale et caractérisée
par une asymétrie, et peut être considéré comme une sous-espèce de « pouvoir de » (Lukes 2021, 39, 74, 78).
Cette distinction remonte à la langue latine, qui distingue entre potentia et potestas, et a été développée par
Baruch Spinoza, pour qui « potentia signifie le pouvoir des choses dans la nature, y compris des personnes,
d’exister et d’agir. Potestas est utilisé lorsqu’il est question d’être sous le pouvoir d’un autre » (ibid., 78). En se
concentrant sur le pouvoir en tant que domination, Spinoza a en outre classifié les moyens de garantir la
conformité aux mécanismes concernant le corps du subordonné, tels que l’emprisonnement physique ou la

613

violence réelle ou potentielle, et les moyens symboliques visant leur esprit, tels que la peur et la tromperie (ibid.,
91–92).
Cette division nous amène au troisième aspect—la distinction entre le pouvoir et la violence. Tout comme la
dualité esprit/corps, la différenciation entre le pouvoir et la violence ne peut pas être séparée de la division
culture/nature, qui imprègne la pensée occidentale moderne, délimitant l’épistémologie de l’ontologie, le
symbolique du physique, les constructions sociales des faits naturels, et le politique et l’historique du donné et de
l’intemporel (Descola 2013 ; Latour 1993). En tant que force physique, la violence est abrupte et immédiate,
tandis que le pouvoir se déploie sur une certaine extension d’espace et de temps qui sert plus facilement de
substrat aux complexités symboliques (Canetti 1981, 281–82). Le contraste entre une violence « naturelle » et un
pouvoir « socialisé » est implicite dans l’œuvre de Max Weber, où la violence est glosée comme un donné et
l’accent est mis sur les arrangements sociaux considérés comme légitimes pour son exercice, en particulier l’État
(par exemple, Weber 1968). Cette perspective trouve un écho chez Alessandro Passerin d’Entrèves (1967), qui
considérait le pouvoir comme une forme de violence institutionnalisée ou qualifiée par la loi, tirant sa légitimité
du contrat social hobbesien. D’autre part, Hannah Arendt a cherché à radicaliser davantage la distinction entre ces
deux concepts dans son ouvrage On Violence, où elle a défini le pouvoir comme la propriété des groupes, qui
concerne la capacité des membres du groupe à agir de concert (1969, 40–44), tandis qu’elle décrivait la violence
comme instrumentale, capable d’être également exercée par des individus. Alors que le pouvoir préserve le
consentement qui a donné naissance aux lois sociales, la violence est alignée sur la force naturelle, que les
instruments de violence sont conçus et utilisés pour multiplier et peuvent finalement remplacer (ibid., 46). Arendt
distinguait en outre la violence et le pouvoir de l’autorité, qui implique une obéissance inconditionnelle basée sur
le respect de la personne donnant l’ordre ou de la fonction qu’elle occupe (ibid., 5). La violence est imprévisible,
car « alors que les résultats des actions des hommes échappent au contrôle des acteurs, la violence recèle en ellemême un élément supplémentaire d’arbitraire ; nulle part Fortuna, bonne ou mauvaise chance, ne joue-t-elle un
rôle plus fatal dans les affaires humaines que sur le champ de bataille » (ibid., 4). Cela rappelle le potentiel des
actions violentes de provoquer une réplique tout aussi destructrice de leurs victimes, contrairement aux formes
plus durables de pouvoir et de domination qui reposent sur le respect et le consentement (qu’ils soient véritables
ou basés sur la tromperie). Cependant, comme le démontre Caroline Ashcroft (2021), un examen des œuvres
complètes d’Arendt révèle une interaction plus complexe entre le pouvoir et la violence, où la violence peut
également contribuer à la constitution de la sphère politique. Cette interaction résonne avec l’oscillation identifiée
par Walter Benjamin (1996) entre la « violence légiférante », qui établit une nouvelle loi, et la « violence
conservatrice », qui applique une loi existante. En d’autres termes, et contrairement à un fait naturel, la violence
ne peut être comprise que par son lien avec la loi, tout comme la loi ne peut être comprise que par rapport à la
violence.

614

Le quatrième point de controverse important dans les débats savants sur le concept de pouvoir a porté sur la
question de savoir si le pouvoir est essentiellement répressif, privant et restreignant ceux sur lesquels il est exercé
par diverses mesures physiques, procédurales ou idéologiques et à différents degrés, inhibant ainsi leur résistance
et leur confrontation avec les puissants (Bachrach et Baratz 1962 ; Gramsci 1977), ou s’il englobe également des
dimensions productives et disciplinaires, façonnant les actions des individus et canalisant leurs agentivités vers
différents objectifs (Foucault 1977 ; 1980).
Le travail de Foucault a également entraîné un changement significatif dans les sciences sociales et la pensée
politique, s’éloignant de la conception du pouvoir comme une substance possédé par des groupes ou des individus
qui l’exercent à leur guise sur autrui, pour considérer le pouvoir comme une dimension constitutive des relations
sociales elles-mêmes. Cette dimension imprègne les relations sociales d’un équilibre asymétrique des forces,
générant diverses formes de domination et de subordination parmi les individus qui, à leur tour, sont constitués
par le pouvoir (Garland 1990, 138). Cependant, malgré cette multiplicité et cette pluridirectionnalité des forces—
où tous les sujets sont constitués par différentes forces mais conservent un niveau de liberté pour résister—les
jeux de pouvoir peuvent se solidifier en états de domination fixés, où des individus et des groupes particuliers
acquièrent et préservent (ou, autrement dit, ils possèdent) une capacité supérieure à contrôler et « produire » les
autres (Foucault 1994, 283).
Le cinquième aspect du pouvoir à discuter ici est sa comparativité, qui est interdépendante avec l’objectif de son
exercice et, donc, avec les concpets de valeur et de hiérarchie. Cette interrelation sous-tend la compréhension
commune selon laquelle les individus ou les groupes diffèrent les uns des autres dans leur capacité respective à
maximiser l’atteinte de leurs objectifs tout en minimisant les efforts. Dans de telles comparaisons, une personne
serait considérée comme plus puissante qu’une autre si cette première peut provoquer des résultats plus
« significatifs » que ceux produits par la dernière (Lukes 2021, 79–85). « Mais comment jugeons-nous la
signification des résultats ? » demande Lukes, puis répond : « La réponse la plus naturelle est : nous examinons
leurs effets sur les intérêts des agents impliqués » (ibid.,85). Le concept d’intérêts nous oriente vers ce qui est
important dans la vie des gens, et donc la plus grande capacité d’une personne ou d’un groupe à promouvoir ses
propres intérêts et à affecter les intérêts centraux ou fondamentaux d’un autre peut indiquer leur supériorité de
pouvoir (ibid., ibid.). Cependant, la question de ce qui est fondamental ou central dans la vie des gens est
controversée. Est-ce, par exemple, leur situation économique, leur sécurité personnelle et leur vie, ou le statut et le
prestige d’eux-mêmes ou de leur groupe (quel que soit sa définition) ?
Par conséquent, l’aspect comparatif du pouvoir est indissociable de la multiplicité et de la contestation des
valeurs. Comme l’a soutenu Friedrich Nietzsche à travers son concept de « volonté de puissance »—cette force
qui pousse les organismes à préserver leur vie et à l’améliorer par la croissance—les jugements de valeur peuvent
eux-mêmes être en jeu dans les luttes de pouvoir, conduisant les gens à tenter de faire prévaloir les jugements de

615

valeur qui leur sont favorables (Nietzsche 1968, 400). L’un de ces jugements de valeur, affirmait Nietzsche, est la
valeur de « vérité », soulignant l’interconnexion entre pouvoir et connaissance. Nietzsche avançait donc l’idée
perspectiviste selon laquelle les êtres s’efforcent de contraindre les autres à accepter comme une norme leur
perspective sur le monde—c’est-à-dire la quantité de réalité qu’ils peuvent saisir, maîtriser et utiliser à leur
service (ibid., 480–81).
D’autre part, d’un point de vue structurel, Louis Dumont a démontré comment les valeurs peuvent être classées de
manière hiérarchique. En général, la hiérarchie est un principe de gradation des éléments dans un ensemble par
rapport à cet ensemble (Dumont 1980, 66). Les valeurs et d’autres éléments deviennent supérieurs aux autres
lorsque leur relation à l’ensemble est telle qu’ils en viennent à englober les autres valeurs et éléments qui les
contredisent, comme la main droite englobe la gauche, la catégorie « Homme » englobe les femmes, ou la pureté
englobe le pouvoir politique dans le contexte indien qu’il explorait (ibid., 75–79, 239–45 ; 2013). Bien que
Dumont ait perçu le pouvoir à travers une lentille weberienne comme une force légitime (idem 1980, 153) et, sur
cette base, l’ait distingué de la hiérarchie, qui est essentiellement une caractéristique de la religion ou de la
cosmologie, on peut supposer que le pouvoir peut également être impliqué dans la détermination de la hiérarchie
entre les composantes d’un ensemble ou dans la manipulation de la définition de cet ensemble de manière à
permettre un arrangement hiérarchique de ses composantes.
Il est à noter que le pouvoir auquel font référence ces chercheurs est exercé par des êtres humains, seuls
considérés comme des agents sociaux dotés d’une volonté ou de la capacité de manipuler ou d’être manipulés par
des symboles. D’autre part, les entités non-humaines, des choses inanimées aux animaux et aux plantes, ainsi que
les esprits et les dieux, ont traditionnellement été considérées dans les sciences modernes occidentales
« naturalistes » (y compris les sciences sociales) comme des forces naturelles qui peuvent limiter l’action humaine
ou être agies par les humains; comme des matières premières à transformer par les humains en produits matériels ;
ou comme des constructions symboliques à inventer par eux, en particulier dans le cas des esprits et des dieux
(Descola 2005, 114–65, 302–06). Ainsi, l’enjeu ultime dans la lutte intersubjective entre le maître et l’esclave
dans la parabole de G.W.F. Hegel est la domination qui réduirait ce dernier à un objet, c’est-à-dire à un non-agent
(2019, 91–98). La pensée marxiste reflète une instrumentalisation de l’exercice du pouvoir sur la nature pour
l’exercice du pouvoir entre les personnes, ou la continuité entre ces deux formes de contrôle. Dans l’économie
politique de Karl Marx, l’exercice du pouvoir entre les humains est basé sur leur appropriation inégale d’objets
non-humains, tels que la terre, le bétail et d’autres moyens de production, et sur le contrôle du processus par
lequel ceux-ci sont transformés en produits (1976). Les penseurs de l’École de Francfort ont ensuite pris en
compte les effets des tendances à la rationalisation instrumentale qui ont émergé pendant les Lumières pour
soutenir que la recherche humaine de contrôle et de maîtrise sur la nature dans la modernité finit par s’étendre à la
domination des êtres humains par d’autres êtres humains (Horkheimer et Adorno 2002). D’autre part, nous

616

observons une approche différente de l’agentivité des entités non-humaines dans la Théorie de l’Acteur-Réseau,
où les « actants » non-humains peuvent, comme les agents humains, participer au cours de l’action et même le
détourner, intervenir et affecter les relations sociales entre les individus, et consolider ou saper les structures
sociales et les asymétries de pouvoir (Latour 2005, 63–86). Cependant, même la reconnaissance de l’agentivité
non-humaine par la Théorie de l’Acteur-Réseau semble se référer davantage au « pouvoir de » de ces entités qu’à
leur « pouvoir sur ». En se concentrant sur la cosmologie—une fois intégrés les postulats ontologiques de la
société étudiée comme outils analytiques—David Graeber et Marshall Sahlins (2017) ont suggéré que le pouvoir
et l’autorité des humains, dans les sociétés étatiques et non étatiques, émulent les pouvoirs cosmiques dominants,
avec des figures reflétant le modèle du « roi-étranger » incorporant et capitalisant sur de telles forces métahumaines.
La non-séparation de l’humanité de la non-humanité dans l’étude du pouvoir politique par Graeber et Sahlins est
essentielle pour l’étude de l’Amazonie, où l’extension de l’agentivité et du « pouvoir sur » au-delà des humains
rend bon nombre des autres définitions et conceptualisations des dynamiques du pouvoir présentées ci-dessus
inadéquates ou nécessitant une révision significative. L’incorporation de l’agentivité non-humaine est cruciale
non seulement pour explorer les dynamiques spécifiques dans les relations entre humains et non-humains, mais
aussi pour comprendre les interactions interhumaines dans un socio-cosmos perçu par ses habitants comme étant
intrinsèquement affecté par les actions et les potentiels des non-humains.
Le pouvoir dans l’Amazonie autochtone
Les anthropologues de l’Amazonie autochtone ont abordé certaines de ces dimensions du concept de pouvoir,
intégrant de plus en plus les perceptions autochtones de l’agentivité non-humaine. Cependant, comme nous le
verrons, les principales approches de cette littérature ont eu tendance à mettre en évidence l’égalitarisme sociopolitique et ontologique caractérisé par une relationalité symétrique.
L’étude du pouvoir dans cette région a largement débuté avec l’ouvrage de Pierre Clastres, La société contre
l’État (1989). Bien qu’il partît du principe que le pouvoir est inhérent à la vie sociale, Clastres s’est
principalement concentré sur la fonction politique formelle du chef dans son étude du pouvoir (ou de son
absence). Tout en admettant que le chef exerce le pouvoir de manière pacifique par la persuasion et la
réconciliation, l’analyse de Clastres était ancrée dans la perception du pouvoir comme essentiellement répressif.
S’appuyant sur des preuves selon lesquelles les chefs amazoniens ne peuvent légitimement exercer la violence sur
les membres du groupe ou s’attendre à l’obéissance en dehors du contexte circonscrit des expéditions de guerre,
Clastres a conclu que « l’espace du chef n’est pas le lieu du pouvoir » et que le chef de la tribu « n’est pas un chef
d’État ». En remettant en question les hypothèses courantes selon lesquelles l’absence de structure étatique dans
les « sociétés primitives » découle d’un échec évolutif à la développer, Clastres a proposé que ces sociétés

617

rejettent intentionnellement le pouvoir (compris comme autorité politique ou même souveraineté) tout comme
elles rejettent la nature, car elles « appréhendent le pouvoir comme la résurgence de la nature ». Les sociétés
amazoniennes placent délibérément les chefs en dehors du tissu social pour réduire leur pouvoir à l’impuissance,
les reléguant à une simple position formelle, et garantissent la séparation entre discours, violence et richesse. Elles
y parviennent grâce à trois flux asymétriques d’échange entre le chef et les autres membres de la société—les
mots, les biens et les femmes—qui s’opposent à l’échange symétrique parmi les membres « ordinaires » de la
société. D’une part, le chef est tenu de fournir à ses membres de nombreux discours, mais ce discours se résume à
des formules vides sans réciprocité ou même attention des autres membres. De plus, il fait face à des demandes
constantes de partager ses biens d’une manière qui l’empêche d’accumuler de la richesse. D’autre part, le chef
reçoit plus de femmes que les autres membres, ce qui crée une asymétrie qui le laisse endetté envers les autres
hommes. La position externe du chef amazonien vis-à-vis de sa société, combinée à l’insertion de l’économie
dans la société, caractéristique des autres sociétés primitives, exclut également l’existence d’une économie
politique. Bien que Clastres ne rend pas ce point explicite, il semble que l’échange équilibré de mots, de biens et
de femmes entre les membres « ordinaires » génère le pouvoir inhérent à la société en tant que collectif plutôt
qu’étant possédé ou exercé par des individus. La seule fonction de ce pouvoir semble être de restreindre le chef.
Nous sommes donc confrontés à une perception quelque peu arendtienne du pouvoir sans une analyse appropriée
des mécanismes réels par lesquels ce pouvoir est constitué ou rendu effectif. De plus, cette analyse ne concerne
que les relations entre les membres masculins du groupe, dont le pouvoir sur les femmes—qui ne figurent ici que
comme des objets d’échange—est présupposé.
Le modèle audacieux de Clastres a été largement critiqué dans l’ethnographie amazonienne, mais dans une large
mesure, il a également posé les jalons des discussions ultérieures sur le pouvoir dans cette région. À l’instar de
Clastres, Waud Kracke (1978) a examiné le pouvoir parmi les Kagwahiv dans le cadre politique formel, observant
un pouvoir qui n’opère pas par la répression et la coercition, mais qui repose sur la persuasion. Cependant,
contrairement à Clastres, plutôt que l’incompatibilité entre les chefs et leurs sociétés, Kracke a démontré comment
les groupes se rassemblent et se forment autour des leaders, définissant le leadership comme un ensemble de
fonctions qui favorisent la formation de groupes et inhibent la fission. Ces fonctions comprennent la « fonction
commotive », qui motive un groupe à travailler vers un objectif commun, et la « fonction arbitrale », qui stimule
la convivialité et le respect du code de conduite informel du groupe. Les types de leaders qui exercent ces
fonctions sont désignés respectivement comme dux et rex (ibid., 84). S’appuyant sur des modèles psychologiques,
Kracke a exploré différents styles de leadership et les motivations derrière le suivi. En discutant ces modèles dans
le contexte du système de parenté kagwahiv, Kracke a affirmé que les leaders atteignent leur position
principalement en donnant leurs filles aux hommes et en contractant ainsi une dette matrimoniale qui garantit le
suivi et le travail des gendres pendant des périodes variables (ibid., 35–37, 235–36). Cette explication remet en

618

question celle de Clastres selon laquelle c’est la polygamie du chef même qui le rendrait endetté—et donc
impuissant—envers son groupe (ibid., 14).
L’observation de Kracke selon laquelle la rareté des femmes fait du beau-père d’un homme le seul individu
disposant d’une base solide pour exercer un contrôle sur cet homme (ibid., 37) nous conduit aux travaux de Peter
Rivière et Terence Turner sur les économies politiques amazoniennes, qui, contrairement au modèle de Clastres,
ne négligent pas ou ne considèrent pas comme acquis le pouvoir que les hommes exercent sur les femmes. Rivière
(1983) a critiqué l’argument de Clastres selon lequel les économies amazoniennes ne sont pas politiques car elles
n’impliquent pas l’accumulation et l’appropriation de richesses excédentaires. S’appuyant notamment sur
l’observation de Turner selon laquelle, au Brésil central, l’économie politique est basée sur la production et la
reproduction sociales plutôt que matérielles (T. Turner 1979, 168), Rivière soutient que, étant donné la pénurie de
main-d’œuvre en Guyane, la richesse dépend de la manipulation réussie des ressources humaines et de leur
incorporation dans la communauté. Bien qu’il se concentre sur le prestige et la richesse du chef de groupe,
l’analyse de Rivière nous fournit des mécanismes générationnels et genrés qui révèlent des dynamiques de
pouvoir plus larges, nous emmenant au-delà de la sphère circonscrite du leadership. Dans ces dynamiques plus
larges, les hommes plus âgés s’approprient les produits de leurs gendres, et les hommes en général s’approprient
la valeur excédentaire de la production féminine pour leur propre avancement politique (ibid. ; voir également
Rivière 1987).
Contrairement à Rivière, Turner va au-delà de l’aspect exploiteur de cette économie politique pour explorer
également ses dimensions productives, où le produit excédentaire n’est pas des objets ou des services mais des
personnes en tant que formes symboliquement objectivées de valeur qui reproduisent la hiérarchie sociale (T.
Turner 2003). La hiérarchie à laquelle Turner fait référence est l’englobement du travail des femmes par le travail
des hommes, et du ménage matri-uxorilocal par les unités segmentaires, elles-mêmes englobées par l’organisation
communautaire qui effectue des cérémonies contrôlées par les hommes (ibid., 15–18 ; voir aussi Lorrain 2000, sur
la base de laquelle il s’appuie). Le fait que ces économies politiques impliquent des personnes et non des biens
limite l’accumulation, car les personnes peuvent quitter un leader volontairement, et les communautés ont
tendance à se diviser au-delà d’une certaine taille démographique (Rivière 1983, 352–53), ce qui entraîne des
hiérarchies tournantes, plutôt que fixes (T. Turner 2003, 20).
L’accent mis sur la hiérarchie réfute la vision, défendue par Clastres et reflétée ailleurs dans la littérature, d’un
égalitarisme amazonien généralisé (par exemple, McCallum 1990; Overing 1989, 161–62). Dans son étude sur la
temporalité profonde du pouvoir politique arawak dans le Xingu, Michael Heckenberger (2005) met en évidence
l’importance cruciale de la hiérarchie en tant que fondement discursif pour le fonctionnement du pouvoir. Sa
recherche, s’appuyant à la fois sur des preuves archéologiques et sur l’ethnographie contemporaine, démontre que
le chef ne possède aucun pouvoir coercitif, bien qu’il puisse sans aucun doute influencer et contrôler les actions

619

des autres (ibid., 330). Le pouvoir xinguano, selon Heckenberger, implique le contrôle de la construction et du
fonctionnement des corps humains (ibid., 312). Ce pouvoir est hiérarchique, car il est gradué selon des principes
généalogiques et organisé dans un modèle concentrique et pyramidal (ibid., 63–65). Il est également spatialisé, car
il est exercé par des individus sur la place du village et investi dans ce site central, perçu lui-même comme une
personne incarnant des ancêtres y enterrés et participant à un système régional classé de personnes-villages. Sur la
base de données archéologiques, Heckenberger a formé l’hypothèse que de tels réseaux de peuplements
constituaient à l’époque précolombienne des entités politiques galactiques (ibid., 124–26).
La spatialisation de la hiérarchie est au cœur d’une autre sous-région amazonienne, située plus près des Andoque,
à savoir, le système arawak-tucanoan, qui s’étend des fleuves Rio Negro et Vaupés à l’Apaporis et le Bas
Caquetá. Dans le cas tucanoan, la mythologie raconte l’émergence successive des ancêtres des sibs, qui
constituent les différents groupes linguistiques de cette sous-région. Ces ancêtres ont voyagé en amont dans un
canoë-anaconda primordial et en sont sortis aux endroits le long du fleuve selon l’ancienneté, les ancêtres du sib
aîné débarquant plus en aval que les ancêtres du sib cadet. Ces mythes servent de modèle idéal avec différents
niveaux d’application pratique, pour l’occupation des terres et les droits d’usufruit des segments du fleuve. Selon
le modèle, plus le sib est ancien, plus il se trouve en aval, garantissant ainsi une plus grande abondance de
poissons et un accès plus significatif aux réseaux d’échange régionaux (Goldman 2004 ; C. Hugh-Jones 1979 ; S.
Hugh-Jones 1993 ; Vidal 1999). Cette hiérarchie se manifeste également dans les prérogatives de leadership et de
rites, impliquant différents degrés de pouvoir pour engager des échanges avec des êtres non-humains et les
influencer pour garantir le bien-être et la reproduction du groupe humain. En raison de la proximité géographique
entre le système arawak-tucanoan et les Peuples du Centre, nous observons des similitudes dans leur organisation
sociale, notamment la patrilocalité, une idéologie forte de descendance agnatique et des conceptions de hiérarchie.
Par conséquent, au fil de la thèse, je reviens à plusieurs reprises sur cette sous-région comme un cas comparatif
privilégié afin de clarifier mes arguments.
L’ancrage de la hiérarchie dans le mythe nous conduit à l’agentivité des entités non-humaines et au pouvoir requis
pour s’engager dans un échange réussi avec elles, ainsi qu’au pouvoir et au prestige découlant de cet échange.
Philippe Descola et Fernando Santos Granero ont critiqué Clastres pour avoir négligé la sphère du rituel et de la
communication avec les non-humaines, où les chamans jouent un rôle décisif, et à travers laquelle ils acquièrent
du prestige et de l’influence politique (Descola 1988 ; Santos Granero 1986). Les deux auteurs soutiennent que
dans les sociétés amazoniennes, les chamans peuvent gagner une influence politique plus grande que les chefs
titulaires pour orienter les membres du groupe, car ils possèdent des connaissances rituelles rares leur permettant
d’exercer un contrôle sur les processus de reproduction et les ressources matérielles ou symboliques sur lesquelles
le groupe compte. Divers ethnographes ont documenté les manières dont les chamans luttent contre de puissants
esprits et animaux dont les pouvoirs sont liés à leurs capacités prédatrices, ainsi que les formes dont ils s’appuient

620

sur les pouvoirs de ces non-humains pour provoquer, guérir ou prévenir les maladies et autres malheurs (par
exemple, Déléage 2009 ; Langdon et Baer 1992 ; Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975). Dans ces études, nous observons la
double représentation du pouvoir, à la fois comme la propriété de chamans spécifiques et de leurs apprentis (par
exemple, Langdon 1992b, 47), d’une part, et comme la propriété de réseaux cosmiques, ou « systèmes
énergétiques globaux » (eadem 1992a, 13), d’autre part. Les interactions du chaman avec ces systèmes
énergétiques le transforment en « une incarnation vivante du pouvoir » (eadem 1992b, 59)—une description qui
se rapproche davantage du concept foucaldien du pouvoir comme la propriété des relations sociales elles-mêmes.
Dans le chapitre 7 de cette thèse, je décris un phénomène similaire, où les Andoque se réfèrent au concept central
de tne’túi, que je définie provisoirement ici comme « le pouvoir en tant qu’esprit », à la fois conféré par le dieu
cannibale Sı̰ ́di, étant la propriété des réseaux de prédation que celui surveille, et la possession temporaire des
individus, représentant leur capacité à accéder aux réseaux prédateurs de Sı̰ ́di et à les utiliser (ainsi que Sı̰ ́di luimême) à leur avantage (voir aussi Reichel-Dolmatoff 1996, 124–26).
Or, on trouve rarement des analyses détaillées des continuités entre cet exercice de pouvoir inter-spécifique
chamanique et l’exercice du pouvoir parmi les êtres humains, autochtones et non-autochtones (par exemple, S.
Hugh-Jones 1994 ; Santos Granero 1993), auxquels Graeber et Sahlins font référence, et qui sont au cœur de cette
thèse. De plus, le terme « chaman », tel qu’il est couramment utilisé dans la littérature en empruntant à la Sibérie,
fusionne souvent les spécialistes du rituel qui opèrent à différentes échelles, utilisent des connaissances et des
méthodes variées et communiquent avec diverses classes d’entités non-humaines. S. Hugh-Jones (1994)
différencie ces praticiens en « chamans horizontaux » et « chamans verticaux », deux types idéaux qui
correspondent respectivement aux aspects ou aux idéologies égalitaires ou hiérarchiques au sein des sociétés où
ils opèrent (parfois en tandem). Cette distinction met également en lumière les économies politiques du savoir au
sein des sociétés amazoniennes hiérarchisées, telles que celles du Nord-Ouest amazonien (Andrello 2010 ; S.
Hugh-Jones 2019b), où le savoir essentiel pour le « chamanisme vertical »—conférant pouvoir politique et
prestige—est entouré de secret et transmis au sein des lignées paternelles de haut rang, contrairement à la
connaissance plus expérimentale et accessible des « chamans horizontaux ».
L’appel de Descola à reconsidérer les chamans en tant qu’agents politiques s’inscrit dans une démarche
intellectuelle plus vaste visant à aligner l’objet et la méthode de recherche sur les conceptions autochtones
amazoniennes de la société et des relations sociales. Ces conceptions concernent non seulement les sujets
humains, mais s’étendent également aux entités non-humaines, telles que les nombreux animaux, plantes et esprits
avec lesquels les individus communiquent tant dans les rituels que dans la vie quotidienne (Descola 1986).
L’approche proposée par Descola et d’autres anthropologues associés au Tournant Ontologique a conduit à une
révision de la définition occidentale moderne de la politique en tant que sphère où seuls les êtres humains sont
considérés comme des sujets moraux et des agents sociaux et politiques. En revanche, cette approche propose le

621

concept du « cosmopolitique », reconnaissant que les entités non-humaines peuvent également occuper ces
positions (de la Cadena 2010). Avant d’aborder les récits « cosmopolitiques » du pouvoir amazonien, il est
nécessaire de faire une brève digression et de plonger dans la dimension de la parenté de l’ontologie amazonienne.
Le Tournant Ontologique en anthropologie amazonienne s’est largement appuyé sur l’étude de la parenté dans la
région, ainsi que sur l’association présentée chez de nombreux peuples autochtones, avec des degrés variés et dans
différents contextes, entre l’échange matrimonial et la prédation. Selon Descola (1998), la prédominance
régionale de la parenté cognatique et dravidienne transforme la consanguinité et l’affinité en opérateurs logiques
relativement abstraits pour considérer et agir vis-à-vis d’un large éventail d’entités et de situations. Les relations
affinales sont particulièrement remarquables à cet égard car, en raison de leur nature instable et souvent
conflictuelle, elles servent dans toute la région de « support métaphorique excellent pour qualifier les relations
avec l’extérieur » (ibid., 36). La considération de l’affinité comme analogue à la prédation est un élément clé de la
résurgence et de la redéfinition par Descola du concept d’animisme en tant que mode d’identification où les
catégories élémentaires structurant la vie sociale sont utilisées pour organiser les relations entre les êtres humains
et non-humains (Descola 1996, 87–88). Cette définition serait ensuite généralisée pour considérer l’animisme
comme un mode d’identification caractérisé par la prémisse selon laquelle tous, ou la plupart, des êtres du cosmos
sont dotés d’intériorités continues et commensurables (subjectivité, agentivité, états mentaux et émotionnels,
normes sociales, etc.), par opposition à des physicalités discontinues et incommensurables (formes et principes
corporelles, et manifestations externes) (Descola 2005).
D’autre part, Eduardo Viveiros de Castro cadre la relation entre l’affinité et la prédation en termes de continuité,
plutôt que d’analogie, l’affinité représentant une actualisation spécifique du modèle relationnel générique de la
prédation (1993, 184–86). De plus, les entités non-humaines ainsi que les humains avec qui on ne peut pas se
marier—catégorisés comme des « affins potentiels »—représentent l’affinité plus que les affins virtuels
(personnes avec qui on peut se marier), les affins réels (celles avec qui on s’est marié), et évidemment, les parents
consanguins, précisément parce que l’alliance actuelle ou les perspectives de mariage introduisent des éléments
consanguins qui atténuent l’affinité (idem 2001; Viveiros de Castro et Fausto 1993). Cette interprétation est
enracinée dans l’adaptation critique de Viveiros de Castro et Carlos Fausto du modèle de parenté dravidien de
Dumont à la réalité amazonienne à travers un autre concept dumontien—à savoir, celui de hiérarchie, comme
discuté précédemment. Contrairement à la structure « équistatutaire » du Dravidianat asiatique, où les catégories
d’affinité et de consanguinité sont en équilibre l’une par rapport à l’autre, dans le Dravidianat amazonien,
l’affinité englobe la consanguinité au niveau supra-local, avec les parents consanguins vivant loin de l’ego étant
« affinisés » et traités comme des affins, en particulier en matière de politique, de rituel, et de cosmologie qui
transcendent la communauté locale. En revanche, l’affinité est englobée par la consanguinité au niveau local, où
les affins réels sont traités comme des consanguins (un processus appelé consanguinisation, ou familiarisation)

622

(Viveiros de Castro 1993 ; 2001; Viveiros de Castro et Fausto 1993). En d’autres termes, en Amazonie, l’affinité
« se pose comme la dimension donnée de la matrice relationnelle cosmique, tandis que la consanguinité relève du
domaine de l’action et de l’intention humaines » (Viveiros De Castro 2001, 19). Il est ici crucial de rappeler que,
contrairement à la plupart des sociétés amazoniennes (y compris les voisins tucanoans et arawaks, qui partagent
une idéologie agnatique), les Andoque et les autres Peuples du Centre n’adhèrent pas au modèle de parenté
dravidien. Cependant, de manière similaire aux Warao—qui dévient également de ce modèle—les Andoque
partagent certaines des dimensions concentriques du modèle de Vivieros de Castro et Fausto (Allard 2010, 98–
99). Au niveau local, ils montrent une certaine tendance à consanguiniser les affins, même si les fortes identités
patrilinéaires de la région les amènent à différencier entre les co-résidents consanguins et affins. Plus important
encore, la cosmologie andoque s’aligne étroitement—peut-être même plus que celle de leurs voisins les autres
Peuples du Centre—avec la conception amazonienne prédominante de la méta-affinité inhérente et de l’affinité
potentielle comme une « altérité déterminée » médiatisant les relations avec l’extérieur (Viveiros de Castro et
Fausto 1993, 151).
Paradoxalement, bien qu’il utilise le concept de hiérarchie entre les catégories, la théorisation globale du
perspectivisme amérindien par Viveiros de Castro, sur laquelle s’appuie également son argument selon lequel
l’affinité est une matérialisation spécifique d’une relationalité prédatrice généralisée, ne reconnaît pas la
possibilité d’asymétries. Selon Viveiros de Castro, le perspectivisme amérindien repose sur l’idée que les
animaux, les esprits et autres entités non-humaines se voient eux-mêmes et les autres membres de leur espèce
comme des êtres humains, tandis qu’ils perçoivent les entités qu’ils chassent comme des pécaris ou d’autres
animaux chassés par les humains, et les entités qui les chassent comme des jaguars, des esprits, ou d’autres entités
représentant les prédateurs des êtres humains (1998). Le perspectivisme implique un multinaturalisme, car les
représentations culturelles tout aussi humaines produites par divers individus de différentes espèces constituent
autant de mondes/natures/ontologies que le nombre de formes corporelles spécifiques à partir desquelles ces
représentations sont projetées. Par exemple, un liquide donné peut être vu comme du sang dans un monde humain
mais perçu comme une bière de maïs dans un monde jaguar (ibid., 477–78). Dans ce sens, la même relation entre
deux entités que l’une peut percevoir comme de la prédation peut être perçue par l’autre comme des relations
sexuelles, c’est-à-dire une alliance affinale. C’est le cas lorsqu’un être humain confond un esprit de la forêt avec
un autre humain et interagit avec lui dans une activité sociale appropriée à deux humains, plutôt qu’à un humain
et à un non-humain. Dans de telles situations, le participant humain se comporte ainsi parce qu’il est « dominé par
la subjectivité non-humaine, passe de son côté, se transformant ainsi en un être de la même espèce que le
locuteur » (ibid., 483). À ma connaissance, cette instance est la seule occurrence où Viveiros de Castro aborde le
pouvoir ou l’asymétrie des relations dans son modèle perspectiviste, la rapprochant momentanément de la
compréhension de Nietzsche de ce terme en tant que tentative de chaque être d’imposer sa perspective sur la

623

réalité aux autres, motivée par la volonté de puissance de chaque être. En revanche, une telle domination est au
cœur de la présente thèse.
Dans leur critique du biais de symétrie dans les nouvelles études sur l’animisme et le perspectivisme amazoniens,
Luiz Costa et Carlos Fausto font référence au projet perspectiviste/multinaturaliste général de Viveiros de Castro
comme à « une disjonction de perspectives qui ne sont jamais réductibles les unes aux autres, ni à une figure
globale de l’Un » (2010, 99). Ils poursuivent : « Le perspectivisme de Viveiros de Castro correspond ainsi à la
politique de Pierre Clastres—c’est une religion contre l’État » (ibid., ibid.). En d’autres termes, en excluant la
nature asymétrique de la relation beau-père/gendre dans toute l’Amazonie (Fausto 2008, 350), l’échange
matrimonial et les relations prédatrices entre deux sujets sont potentiellement symétriques, car les deux parties
peuvent également s’intégrer mutuellement dans leur réseau de parenté ou de réalité. Dans le cas de la prédation
réelle, l’animal chassé peut contre-chasser son prédateur sous forme de maladies ou d’autres malheurs (Viveiros
de Castro 1998, 472), et le modèle de Viveiros de Castro ne permet aucune mesure intégrée pour dissiper cette
ambiguïté.
Costa et Fausto critiquent également Descola pour avoir minimisé la relationalité asymétrique et la hiérarchie
dans les sociétés animistes, des conceptions dont il reconnaît l’existence, dans le cas des Amériques autochtones,
uniquement dans les sociétés qu’il définit comme « analogiques », où toutes les entités humaines et non-humaines
présentent des discontinuités tant en ce qui concerne l’intériorité que la physicalité (2010, 99). Pour les contextes
d’Asie du Sud-Est, d’autres chercheurs ont noté la compatibilité de l’animisme avec les structures hiérarchiques.
Dans ces sociétés, la subjectivité universelle des êtres n’est pas segmentée horizontalement à travers les corps,
mais est graduée verticalement, de sorte que chaque être possède un niveau différent d’esprit ou de puissance (K.
Århem 2015b, 25). En conséquence, les animaux domestiqués, considérés comme inférieurs dans cette hiérarchie,
peuvent être manipulés et sacrifiés pour protéger la vie humaine (Sprenger 2015, 34–35 ; voir également Descola
2023). Revenant à l’Amazonie, Costa et Fausto remettent en question l’argument de Descola selon lequel
l’animisme est congruent uniquement avec des modes de relations symétriques, où les parties ont un statut
ontologique égal et les relations entre elles peuvent être renversées, telles que l’échange, le don et la prédation
(Costa et Fausto 2019, 213). Au contraire, ils appellent à explorer les possibilités que l’idiome de la maîtrise,
largement répandu dans toute l’Amazonie, offre pour comprendre à la fois l’animisme régional contemporain et
les structures de domination de type étatique qui étaient plus courantes en Amazonie avant la conquête
européenne (Costa et Fausto 2019, 100 ; par exemple, les structures explorées par Heckenberger 2005).
Les travaux de Fausto et Costa sur la maîtrise et la conception étroitement liée de familiarisation sont cruciaux
pour la présente discussion sur les conceptions amazoniennes de pouvoir. Tout d’abord, ces travaux reflètent le
principe ontologique régional commun concernant l’agentivité sociale des êtres non-humains et leur intériorité
commensurable avec celle des humains. Deuxièmement, ils introduisent des éléments significatifs d’asymétrie

624

dans le modèle symétrique de prédation/alliance. Dans le cas du concept de familiarisation, ou, plus précisément,
de la prédation familiarisante, Fausto le fait en reformulant l’idiome régional de la relationalité affinale en termes
politico-économiques, considérant la prédation familiarisante comme le « schéma principal d’appropriation dans
les économies symboliques amazoniennes » (Fausto 1999, 937). Dans ce processus, l’Autre approprié,
généralement considéré comme un affin—que ce soit un époux, un nouveau-né, l’esprit d’un ennemi mort, ou des
animaux chassés ou capturés comme animaux de compagnie—est investi des affects et des dispositions du groupe
consanguin du captif (ibid., 939 ; 2007, 502). Ce processus implique de réduire tout danger de prédation ou toute
autre forme d’hostilité de la part du patient transformé envers l’agent transformateur et leurs proches, et de
convertir le comportement du patient en un comportement bénéfique à leur égard. Fausto et Costa soulignent
l’asymétrie de la familiarisation, qui convertit les processus méta-affinaux symétriques d’échange marital et de
prédation en relations méta-filiales modelées d’après les liens de consanguinité verticale et les complète dans la
production amazonienne de parenté (Fausto 2008 ; Costa et Fausto 2019 ; Fausto et Costa 2021 ; 2022).
La conversion de la symétrie en asymétrie se manifeste à travers l’idiome de la maîtrise, qui indique la capacité du
maître, en déterminant la direction de la familiarisation, à intégrer l’agentivité de l’animal de compagnie—ou,
plus généralement, le compagnon—à la leur, devenant ainsi une personne amplifiée, une « singularité plurielle ».
La maîtrise peut se présenter sur diverses échelles, car les maîtres humains et non-humains peuvent posséder
d’autres personnes, des objets matériels et immatériels (mythes, danses ou sorts), ainsi que des lieux et des
espèces entières (Fausto 2008 ; Costa 2017). La dynamique maître-compagnon amazonienne représente la forme
subjectivante que prend la dialectique du maître-esclave de Hegel dans cette région, où aucune des parties n’est
réduite à un objet (Fausto et Costa 2021, 5). Conservant son agentivité et sa subjectivité, c’est à travers son
altérité que le compagnon magnifie son maître. Cependant, bien que la familiarisation et la maîtrise reflètent une
plus grande asymétrie que l’alliance conjugale et l’acte de prédation entre espèces, la non-extinction de
l’agentivité du compagnon signifie que ces relations sont également potentiellement inversibles, puisque le
compagnon peut à son tour familiariser son maître et incorporer son agentivité et sa vitalité aux siennes, plutôt
que dans l’autre sens (Costa et Fausto 2019). Néanmoins, cette inversibilité ne doit pas être vue comme un simple
renversement relationnel entre deux parties stables, car les mesures et les effets de la familiarisation et de la
maîtrise laissent des traces sur les parties, participant ainsi à la constitution même du « sujet animiste » (ibid.,
214–215).
Cela évoque la conceptualisation foucaldienne du pouvoir en tant que subjectivation, qui apparaît dans
l’ethnographie régionale dans le traitement du pouvoir par Santos Granero en tant que capacité de l’agent à former
et transformer la subjectivité du patient, ou à étendre leur propre subjectivité à celle du patient (Santos Granero
2009a), et dans la description par Harry Walker des processus de formation du sujet chez les Urarina à travers des
chaînes de compagnonnages asymétriques entre différents agents, humains et non-humains (bébé et placenta, une

625

personne et de la bière de manioc, un chaman et une plante, etc.) (2013). L’étude de Walker nous ramène
également aux relations entre le pouvoir amazonien et le leadership, car il conclut que, puisque les conceptions
autochtones d’autonomie excluent toute possibilité de coercition par le leader, le leadership repose sur la capacité
à inspirer et à mobiliser les autres. Par conséquent, le véritable pouvoir en Amazonie implique la capacité à
former des individus et des groupes sociaux dès le départ, c’est-à-dire à former des sujets qui pourraient être
inspirés et mobilisés (ibid., 214).
Cependant, le modèle de Fausto et Costa représente la modalité régionale spécifique de la notion générale de
subjectivation et la manière dont elle s’articule avec les structures concrètes ainsi qu’abstraites de la parenté et les
dynamiques de prédation dans la région. De plus, la prolifération des asymétries dans les relations entre les
humains et entre eux et les non-humains dans le discours et les pratiques andoque, associée à leur accent prononcé
sur les maîtres et les notions de propriété, rend ce modèle particulièrement pertinent pour l’intérêt de cette thèse
pour les dynamiques du pouvoir. Chez les Andoque, l’idée de maîtrise est encapsulée dans le nom ño̰, qui signifie
littéralement « personne », et que je rends tout au long de la thèse par « personne-maître » pour le distinguer
d’autres types de personnes. Ce terme est particulièrement révélateur lorsque les compagnons en question sont des
entités non-humaines et des choses abstraites, comme un mythe, une danse ou un sort, car cela implique que le
maître/propriétaire de cette entité ou chose en est la personnification : leur aspect agentif, semblable à celui d’un
humain. Dans cette relation, la partie inférieure est identifiée par l’un des deux termes qui impliquent des degrés
variables d’agentivité prédatrice, de soumission et d’aliénabilité : ḭéna̰, ou « compagnon », et ’ihɵ́ɵ, qui signifie «
orphelin ». Le premier terme fait généralement référence à un être d’une autre espèce ou forme corporelle
accompagnant et assistant son maître, tandis que le second désigne un parent affiné subordonné et aliénable
adopté par le maître. La multi-scalabilité et la capacité transcendant le contexte du modèle de Fausto et Costa en
font un cadre avantageux pour découvrir les continuités à travers diverses instances d’exercice du pouvoir, ainsi
que les forces contradictoires qui opèrent parfois au sein de la réalité andoque.
Un autre aspect précieux de ce modèle est l’accent mis sur la commensalité en tant que pratique centrale
complétant la prédation dans la fabrication de personnes et de groupes. Cela doit être compris dans le contexte
d’un cosmos amazonien où les différences entre les êtres sont basées sur des attributs physiques plutôt
qu’intérieurs, d’où la parenté est activement produite à travers la fabrication de corps (Vilaça 2002). Le sens de
l’alimentation introduit une asymétrie, remplaçant les relations précédentes de parenté de la personne nourrie par
une nouvelle consubstantialité avec le nourricier (Fausto 2007a ; Fausto et Costa 2013), et mettant en lumière
l’importance de la perspective du don dans l’étude des sociétés amazoniennes, en raison des caractéristiques de
don des substances consommées. L’exploration relativement limitée du paradigme du don en Amazonie a été
attribuée à la logique « homosubstitutive » qui y prévaut, où les choses ne peuvent pas remplacer des personnes
comme c’est le cas dans les transactions objectivées comme « échanges de dons » en Mélanésie, où la théorie du

626

don a évolué (Descola 2001 ; McCallum 1989). Cependant, S. Hugh-Jones a démontré la pertinence du paradigme
du don pour comprendre les cultes secrets de la flûte et les échanges cérémoniels, ainsi que les échanges plus
quotidiens dans le complexe tucano-arawakien du Nord-Ouest de l’Amazonie, où l’on observe des homologies
entre les parties du corps et les substances, d’une part, et les artefacts et les espèces naturelles, d’autre part (2001 ;
2013). En adoptant la conceptualisation de Marylin Strathern de l’« échange de dons » comme échange
médiatisé—où une partie détachée de la personne A passe d’elle à la personne B—ou échange non médiatisé—où
A agit directement sur B—pour déplacer une relation antérieure enregistrée chez B (1988, 178–79, 292), HughJones soutient que dans les échanges dans le Nord-Ouest de l’Amazonie, différents aspects des identités des
donateurs sont objectivés dans les articles qu’ils échangent. Cette caractéristique réapparaît dans le troc à travers
toute l’Amazonie (S. Hugh-Jones 2013, 371), et sous-tend les dimensions de familiarisation de l’alimentation,
comme discuté ci-dessus. Le paradigme du don est pertinent pour l’étude actuelle pour deux raisons.
Premièrement, parce que le commerce est essentiel à l’éthos andoque et que les objets servent souvent de
métonymies pour les personnes. Deuxièmement, parce que l’échange de dons établit des hiérarchies et des
relations de domination entre les individus grâce à l’échange de dons non équivalents (Gregory 2015, 13–14 ;
Mauss 2002)—une dynamique la plus évidente dans le partage des substances rituelles parmi les Andoque.
Cette revue bibliographique fournit les éléments nécessaires pour proposer une analogie entre l’alliance/la
prédation et la familiarisation et la maîtrise, d’une part, et la violence et le pouvoir et la domination, d’autre part.
Tout comme l’alliance/la prédation, la violence reflète une symétrie dans le sens que son exercice est susceptible
de conduire à un contrôle et à une domination moins durables sur son objet au fil du temps. À moins d’être
complétée par des manipulations symboliques ou d’autres moyens répressifs, la violence exercée par une partie
peut dégénérer en une bagarre ou un duel, ce qui reflète une symétrie plus large entre les deux parties. Alors que
la pensée occidentale moderne a tendance à considérer la violence comme plus proche de la nature que la
domination, et donc semblable à la force physique, comme faisant partie du plan de réalité donné, l’alliance/la
prédation est perçue dans les sociétés amazoniennes autochtones comme le tissu inhérent de la cosmo-socialité
entre les membres de différents groupes et espèces, avant que les éléments qui y participent ne soient appropriés
dans des corps personnels ou collectifs (groupes sociaux et espèces). En d’autres termes, tandis que la violence et
l’alliance/la prédation appartiennent toutes deux au plan de réalité donné dans chaque ontologie, ce que ce plan
constitue varie selon les ontologies.
À l’inverse, la familiarisation et la maîtrise impliquent la manipulation des corps et des symboles pour établir des
formes plus durables d’asymétrie et de contrôle, intégrant ainsi l’agentivité d’une partie à celle d’une autre. À cet
égard, elles présentent des similitudes avec diverses formes de domination, telles que la légitimation de la
violence par le droit, le discours hégémonique ou les procédures de prise de décision. Tout comme ces dernières
formes de domination, la familiarisation et la maîtrise sont activement construites plutôt qu’inhérentes au plan de

627

réalité donné. Cependant, il est important de noter que le plan de réalité construit varie selon les ontologies. Alors
que les trois exemples de domination que j’ai mentionnés peuvent être catégorisés comme « sociaux » ou
« culturels », la familiarisation et la maîtrise ciblent principalement le corps du patient, le domaine qui, dans la
pensée occidentale moderne, serait considéré comme « naturel », visant à déconnecter le patient du tissu affinal
généralisé et à le connecter à la forme corporelle et aux dispositions du maître en tant que son méta-consanguin.
La dernière approche de la notion de pouvoir en Amazonie que j’examine ici est celle de Steven Rubenstein, qui
représente une combinaison de communication entre humains et non-humains, d’économie politique et de
psychanalyse. Dans ses travaux sur le pouvoir parmi les Shuars, Rubenstein a d’abord démontré comment les
relations que les individus établissent avec les âmes guerrières dans les visions amplifient leur capacité à
combattre et à échanger avec d’autres êtres humains et non-humains, et ensuite comment la circulation et/ou
l’accumulation de cette forme et d’autres formes et signes de pouvoir par les individus Shuars, les organisations
représentatives et les instituts non-autochtones à différentes époques reflètent et créent des relations asymétriques
entre eux (2007). De plus, Rubenstein (2012) a introduit un modèle complexe basé sur les travaux à la fois de
Clastres et de Jacques Lacan pour expliquer comment les visions shuars impliquant des entités non-humaines
constituent une subjectivité fondamentalement différente de la bourgeoise et produisent un pouvoir personnel qui
n’est pas traduit en domination politique. Tout en s’appuyant sur l’argument de Clastres sur la disjonction
amazonienne entre violence et discours pour expliquer l’inexistence du pouvoir en tant qu’autorité coercitive
parmi les Shuars, Rubenstein a expliqué la formation de la subjectivité shuar en ayant recours à la distinction de
Jacques Lacan entre le Réel, l’Imaginaire et le Symbolique, et sa théorie concernant le stade du miroir. Lacan a
soutenu que dans ce stade, un enfant grandissant dans une société occidentale ou bourgeoise intériorise son propre
auto-image et est initié dans le registre Imaginaire de la réalité—qui consiste en des images que les gens se font
d’eux-mêmes et des autres. Cette intériorisation est une étape critique dans le processus par lequel le registre
symbolique—la partie de la réalité qui entre dans le langage—colonise le réel, qui est la partie de la réalité qui a
jusqu’à présent résisté au langage. En revanche, les individus shuars n’entrent pas dans l’Imaginaire par un stade
du miroir mais par les visions de rencontres avec des êtres non-humains qui représentent des sujets autres qu’euxmêmes, des expériences qu’ils rencontrent dès leur plus jeune âge. Cette inauguration de l’Imaginaire laisse de
vastes territoires du Réel qui ne sont pas colonisés par le symbolique mais impliquent plutôt la colonisation de ce
dernier par le premier (ibid., 51, 54). Alors que ces visions non médiatisées servent à amplifier leur pouvoir et leur
agentivité, les gens en viennent à identifier le langage comme le domaine de la méconnaissance, ce qui entraîne
une nette division entre le pouvoir et la parole (ibid., 52). La perte de l’esprit guerrier acquis dans les visions par
le partage de la vision avec d’autres dans des conversations signale une dissonance entre la socialité avec les nonhumains et la socialité avec les humains, ainsi qu’une disjonction entre l’acquisition du pouvoir et sa
manifestation (ibid., 56-57). En soulignant le lien entre le pouvoir, l’opacité et le secret, Rubenstein affirme : « Le

628

pouvoir ne provenait pas d’une coordination de l’Imaginaire et du Symbolique (que ce soit « Dieu » ou « le
Peuple ») mais plutôt d’une coordination de l’Imaginaire et du Réel » (ibid., 66 ; voir aussi idem 2007, 369).
Pourtant, bien que stimulant, le modèle exposé par Rubenstein est seulement marginalement pertinent pour
comprendre les dynamiques de pouvoir des Andoque, en raison de leur plus grande emphase sur une idéologie de
descendance, de leur sous-évaluation du service de la mariée uxorilocale, et, surtout, du manque d’utilisation de
substances hallucinogènes (du moins au présent). Cependant, j’emprunte à Rubenstein l’indication d’engager le
cadre de Lacan concernant les trois registres de la réalité dans une analyse du pouvoir. Cela me servira à proposer
l’hypothèse, dans les chapitres 9 et 12, que diverses entités non-humaines désignées sous le nom de fi’du en
andoque ou de diablo en espagnol, ainsi que l’argent liquide et les espèces par opposition à des biens
manufacturés spécifiques, sont considérées comme particulièrement puissantes et menaçantes parce qu’elles
appartiennent à des territoires du registre du Réel de la réalité qui n’ont pas encore été symbolisés par des noms et
des mythes, et, de cette manière, apprivoisés. En juxtaposant les travaux de Rubenstein, cette hypothèse peut
servir, en temps voulu, de base pour comparer les formes de pouvoir à travers l’Amazonie, ce qui dépasse le cadre
de la présente thèse.
De plus, le travail de Rubenstein constitue un effort inspirant pour engager des analyses symétriques des
interactions des peuples autochtones avec à la fois le monde non-humain « traditionnel » et les institutions
modernes non-autochtones, telles que le marché et l’État, ainsi que les organisations autochtones, en particulier
les organisations représentatives. Son œuvre représente donc une stratégie pour combler le fossé entre les
approches politico-économiques et ontologiques en anthropologie latino-américaine (Lazar 2022), dans un
contexte de critiques croissantes à l’encontre de cette dernière approche pour son appauvrissement des
complexités ethnographiques, sa négligence des changements historiques, et son privilège accordé aux voix
autoritaires pour reproduire des discours ontologiques opposés aux non-autochtones, qui dépeignent des utopies
futures mais manquent souvent de pertinence pour les problèmes du « monde réel » (real world problems ;
Bessire et Bond 2014 ; Graeber 2015; Nadasdy 2021). En interrogeant les dynamiques de pouvoir survenant dans
les interactions des Andoque avec à la fois des agents non-humains et non-autochtones, ma recherche vise
également à surmonter cette division.
Cadre conceptuel et argument
Cette thèse étudie les conceptions de pouvoir d’une société amazonienne spécifique—à savoir, les Andoque—et
interroge les dynamiques complexes du pouvoir au sein de cette société, ainsi qu’entre les Andoque et d’autres
agents humains et non-humains. Je ne définis pas le pouvoir en termes de coercition, et je ne privilégie pas non
plus sa recherche dans le domaine du leadership ou de la sphère politique publique (par exemple, les assemblées
communautaires ou les organisations représentatives). Je conceptualise plutôt le pouvoir dans le cadre de

629

l’échange, comme la capacité des agents humains et non-humains à transformer des relations symétriques
d’échanges de corps, de principes vitaux, de biens matériels et d’actions en relations asymétriques qui profitent à
leurs efforts pour fabriquer des personnes, tout en contrebalançant les déséquilibres adverses. Cette définition
implique que le pouvoir se manifeste également dans les préconditions de l’échange : la capacité de refuser ou de
suspendre l’échange et de participer à la transaction en tant qu’agent, plutôt qu’objet échangé. Inévitablement,
nous devons définir le « profit » ou l’objectif de ces échanges. En gros, cet objectif serait l’affirmation et
l’amélioration de la vie, comme l’évoque la « volonté de puissance » de Nietzsche, ou, dans des termes plus
amazoniens, la fabrication de personnes (Fausto 1999, 936–37 ; T. Turner 2003, 11).
La conceptualisation du pouvoir dans le cadre de l’échange n’implique pas nécessairement qu’il soit harmonieux ;
en effet, la prédation représente une forme d’échange hostile. Plus largement, en analysant divers exemples de
commerce et de dons, j’interprète ces activités à travers le prisme des logiques prédatrices. De plus, la dimension
de la symétrie et de l’asymétrie doit être évaluée par rapport à l’objectif général de la fabrication de personnes.
Par conséquent, la prédation est potentiellement symétrique dans la mesure où, sans familiariser sa proie, le
chasseur risque d’être assimilé dans la société de l’animal plutôt que d’utiliser la proie pour soutenir sa propre vie
et fabriquer des parents. En revanche, le commerce peut être asymétrique si les articles échangés n’aident qu’une
seule partie à atteindre ces objectifs, tout en nuisant à l’autre.
Mon attention dans cette thèse porte sur la capacité des agents—des leaders aux membres ordinaires, ainsi que des
entités non-humaines et des collectifs tels que les clans ou l’ensemble du peuple andoque—à remodeler les
relations horizontales de prédation et d’alliance en relations verticales de familiarisation et de maîtrise, où ils
contrôlent les échanges et intègrent l’agentivité des autres à la leur. Bien que couvrant les domaines de la
politique, de l’économie, de la parenté, du mythe et du rituel, mon analyse des dynamiques de pouvoir andoque
peut être distillée à des échanges au sein de trois domaines conceptuels avec des distinctions, qui se chevauchent
parfois mais sont distingués ici pour des fins explicatives : ontologique (humanité vs non-humanité), parenté
(consanguinité agnatique et cognatique, et affinité), et spatial (source de la rivière, centre ou milieu de la rivière et
embouchure).
Dans le domaine ontologique, les échanges sont enracinés dans le principe animiste d’une intériorité partagée
entre des êtres aux formes corporelles distinctes. Cette intériorité partagée conduit à une substitution réciproque
par défaut des personnes d’un type pour celles d’un autre. En revanche, les individus capables se livrent à des
manipulations ontologiques pour créer une asymétrie avec les non-humains en imposant un échange
hétérosubstitutif, dans lequel ils compensent le gibier avec des substances végétales, ou en exploitant
l’homosubstitution dans les assauts de sorcellerie, transformant les victimes humaines en proie.

630

La manipulation ontologique est étroitement liée à l’agentivité graduée, qui devient apparente dans les pratiques et
les images de parenté. Dans ce contexte, malgré les principes de parenté cognatique des Andoque, leurs fortes
identités claniques favorisent les tentatives d’asymétrie dans les relations entre les clans. La descendance
agnatique est associée à une plus grande agentivité en comparaison avec les parents non agnatiques, les nonparents et les non-humains. Chez les humains, une agentivité diminuée ressemble à des états de domination (par
exemple, chez les orphelins), tandis que chez les non-humains, elle peut être parallèle, mais ne pas équivaloir à
l’objectification du naturalisme.
Enfin, le pouvoir est ancré dans les perceptions spatiales. Les Andoque, à la fois en tant que groupe ethnique et en
tant que clans distincts, se considèrent comme les habitants du centre d’un monde orienté sur le cours du fleuve,
résultant dans la division de l’espace environnant ce peuple (et chaque clan individuel) en amont, plus proche de
la source de la rivière, et en aval, plus près de l’embouchure. La notion centrale du « pouvoir en tant qu’esprit »
mentionné précédemment, le tne’túi, prend son origine à la source de la rivière et des capacités prédatrices
attribuées aux parents affins mythiques habitant cette région cosmique. Le centre et ses habitants aspirent à tirer
parti de ce pouvoir pour assurer leur survie, leur bien-être et leur prospérité, ainsi que pour se protéger des centres
humains et non-humains concurrents. Pour ce faire, ils recourent à diverses procédures de familiarisation et
d’appropriation visant à englober la source de la rivière, y compris ses héros mythiques et ses éléments rituels.
Une quête similaire d’englobement caractérise également la relation du centre avec l’embouchure—un domaine
affinal représentant les personnes non-autochtone, qui ont historiquement approché le territoire andoque de cette
direction. J’explore les nombreuses stratégies que les Andoque ont employées au fil du temps pour exploiter les
forces provenant de la source de la rivière afin de familiariser l’embouchure, pouvoir disposer des objets et des
capacités qui lui sont associés, et veiller à ce que les échanges avec les agents en aval ne conduisent pas à des
déséquilibres périlleux dans les dynamiques entre les différents centres de leur propre territoire.
Les aspects de la manipulation ontologique, de l’agentivité graduée et de l’englobement sont des caractéristiques
hiérarchiques de l’animisme andoque dont la réalisation repose sur la connaissance de mythes et de procédures
rituelles. Les individus et les groupes s’appuient sur cette connaissance pour établir et maintenir des asymétries
avec les êtres non-humains afin d’étendre et de maintenir des déséquilibres similaires dans leurs interactions avec
d’autres êtres humains (Andoque, non-Andoque ou non-autochtones), et vice versa. Cependant, l’incertitude dans
l’échange avec ces deux types d’êtres rend ces asymétries, ainsi que les asymétries supplémentaires qui s’y
appuient, intrinsèquement précaires.
Ma recherche contribue au débat plus large sur le pouvoir dans les sciences sociales et de la pensée politique en
mettant en lumière la continuité entre les interactions sociales parmi les humains et celles impliquant des nonhumains dans les sociétés où les derniers sont reconnus comme des agents, ce qui fait progresser les travaux des
théoriciens de l’acteur-réseau, ainsi que de Graeber et Sahlins. Parallèlement, elle fait progresser l’exploration du

631

continuum relationnel humain-non-humain au sein de l’animisme et du perspectivisme amazoniens, tels qu’ils ont
été théorisés par Descola et Viveiros de Castro. Mon approche révèle les dynamiques de pouvoir qui imprègnent
les relations dans une sous-région amazonienne caractérisée par une idéologie agnatique et des conceptions et
pratiques de parenté associées—à savoir, le Caquetá-Putumayo. En m’appuyant sur les modèles de la
familiarisation et de la maîtrise en Amazonie de Fausto et Costa, ma recherche établit le pouvoir à la fois comme
le résultat et l’instrument dans un enchaînement de relations symétriques et principalement asymétriques. Je
démontre comment ces processus sont intégrés dans l’espace et incarnés dans la mythologie, mettant en évidence
leur importance à travers divers contextes, y compris les économies extractivistes et préservationnistes. Mon
analyse remet donc en question la perception de l’égalitarisme souvent associée à la région, permettant une
comparaison des configurations animistes dans le Caquetá-Putumayo avec celles d’autres zones, telles que les
sociétés asiatiques étudiées par Århem et Sprenger.
Méthodologie
Cette thèse repose sur une enquête de terrain menée entre avril 2018 et juin 2019 dans le territoire ancestral des
Andoque, ainsi que sur des entretiens avec des migrants andoque à Leticia en juillet 2019, et une visite sur le
terrain en juillet-août 2021. De plus, entre mai et août 2023, j’ai mené plusieurs entretiens vidéo et en personne
avec des interlocuteurs à Bogotá et à Leticia pour compléter les informations. Au cours de ma longue période de
travail sur le terrain, j’ai alterné entre sept peuplements andoque, y compris l’agglomération pluriethnique
d’Araracuara, passant des durées variables dans chaque peuplement. Au fil du temps, les intérêts de recherche, les
dynamiques interpersonnelles avec mes hôtes dans chaque peuplement, et les différentes circonstances de leur vie,
telles que leurs voyages et engagements, m’ont amené à diviser mon temps principalement entre deux hameaux :
Puerto Alegría, où se trouve la maloca de Fisi du Clan Aigle, et San José, le principal peuplement du Clan Soleil,
où je suis resté chez Tañe et Irene. Cette rotation stratégique m’a permis de développer des relations et de
m’engager dans des conversations avec des membres de tous les clans. Elle m’a exposé à des versions diverses de
mythes, de traditions rituelles, de récits d’événements historiques récents, d’interprétations de la politique
communautaire contemporaine, et même de commérages, tous essentiels pour comprendre les conceptions
abstraits de pouvoir et les dynamiques de pouvoir concrètes.
L’accent mis à la fois sur les « conceptions » et les « dynamiques » du pouvoir correspond à l’effort de cette thèse
d’explorer à la fois le discours et la pratique andoque. Ma discussion trace la tension entre le discours des
interlocuteurs et les idées tirées des récits mythologiques concernant les formes autochtones de pouvoir et sa
possession, y compris le leadership et l’autorité idéaux, d’une part, et les observations sur le terrain reflétant un
moment historique marqué par une quasi-dislocation totale du leadership et de l’autorité autochtones, d’autre part.
Cette désintégration se produit dans le contexte d’asymétries persistantes dans les échanges avec les agents nonautochtones, y compris les acteurs du marché et l’État. Le leadership andoque traditionnel et moderne (c’est-à-

632

dire les chefs de clan et les anciens ainsi que les gouverneurs et les membres du cabildo) est aujourd’hui faible,
fragmenté, et semble ne pas répondre aux normes fixées à la fois par les leaders et les membres ordinaires de la
société. De plus, la connaissance nécessaire pour établir et maintenir des asymétries de pouvoir est devenue une
ressource symbolique rare à la suite d’un génocide qui a éradiqué de nombreux sages et traditions orales. Par
conséquent, elle est vivement contestée par les individus et les clans aujourd’hui, et soumise à des dynamiques
complexes de dissimulation et de divulgation au sein de la société andoque, symptomatiques de leurs
compétitions pour le pouvoir.
Mon travail sur le terrain consistait en une observation participante, au cours de laquelle je me joignais aux
membres du foyer dans leurs activités quotidiennes. Celles-ci comprenaient le jardinage, la préparation de la
poudre de coca, la collecte des ressources de la forêt, la pêche, et, à de rares occasions, la chasse—une activité où
mes hôtes admettaient timidement que j’étais plus un obstacle qu’une aide. De plus, j’ai assisté à divers
événements qui se déroulaient de manière irrégulière, notamment des assemblées internes et celle de l’association
régionale représentative, des réunions avec des organisations externes, et des activités financées par celles-ci. Lors
de certains de ces événements, j’ai servi de secrétaire, documentant les procédures sur la désignation des
Andoque. Les informations ont été recueillies à la fois pendant ces activités quotidiennes et irrégulières et lors de
conversations à la maison à d’autres occasions, notamment pendant les séances de mambeadero. Mes
interlocuteurs exprimaient fréquemment de la nostalgie pour l’état passé de cet espace social nocturne masculin,
qu’ils prétendaient autrefois soumis à une étiquette plus stricte. Par le passé, une hiérarchie accordait des droits de
parole en fonction de l’âge et du statut rituel, les rassemblements étaient plus nombreux, parfois avec des dizaines
de participants, et la fréquence des visites des aînés était plus élevée. Lors de ces visites, des dialogues entre les
aînés se déroulaient selon des codes spécialisés, excluant ainsi efficacement les participants plus jeunes. Bien que
j’aurais été désireux d’assister et de documenter une session fortement ritualisée, la nature moins formelle des
mambeaderos d’aujourd’hui a apporté certains avantages pour ma recherche. Les rassemblements plus petits,
généralement pas plus de sept personnes, permettaient une atmosphère plus confortable pour engager la
conversation. Cette absence relative de formalité a transformé de nombreuses séances de mambeadero en
opportunités de partage d’informations délibéré, soit par l’initiative de mes interlocuteurs, qui introduisaient
divers mythes et sujets, soit par la mienne, à travers lesquelles je sondais en profondeur des thèmes observés lors
des activités diurnes. Ces conversations de mambeadero plutôt spontanées ont remplacé les interviews, qui étaient
peu fréquentes et principalement réservées aux individus andoque dans les villes où le temps était limité. Même
ces entretiens étaient non structurés, ressemblant à des conversations libres où je dirigeais la discussion vers des
questions spécifiques que j’avais préparées ou des thèmes que je visais à explorer.
Pendant mes conversations avec des individus andoque, j’ai recueilli des mythes auprès de tout narrateur
volontaire, parfois en rassemblant différentes versions du même récit. Dans ma thèse, j’ai choisi la version la plus

633

complète pour des raisons de clarté et je me suis efforcé de rester fidèle au récit original du conteur. J’ai intégré
des détails provenant d’autres interlocuteurs uniquement lorsque cela était nécessaire à la compréhension et à
condition qu’ils ne contredisent pas le récit choisi. De plus, j’ai cherché à rendre compte de la polyphonie
andoque en reconnaissant l’existence de multiples versions et interprétations de chaque mythe. Parfois, j’ai inclus
des hypothèses sur certains mythes suggérées par des personnes qui n’étaient pas considérées—ou ne se
considéraient pas—comme des autorités, afin d’illustrer la signification personnelle et les interprétations variées
de ces récits dans la vie des gens.
La centralité de la mythologie et son analyse dans cette thèse reflète l’importance des récits mythiques dans la vie
des Andoque, en particulier pour leur aspect « charter », dans la reformulation mentionnée par Jacopin (2010), en
tant que moyen de transmettre l’agentivité et de fournir aux narrateurs et aux auditeurs « un vade-mecum social
mais non normatif » (ibid.). En m’inspirant de la vision de Percy Cohen (1969) selon laquelle différentes
approches de la mythologie se complètent et se renforcent mutuellement, j’examine les récits mythiques à travers
des lentilles structurelles, historiques, sociologiques, psychologiques et rituelles. Dans le contexte de cette
recherche, je considère la mythologie comme un médium à travers lequel les Andoque justifient, explorent et
mettent en œuvre des relations de pouvoir avec les êtres humains et non-humains.
Mon travail sur le terrain s’est principalement déroulé en espagnol, qui est aujourd’hui la langue parlée
prédominante parmi les Andoque, qui utilisent rarement leur langue native dans leurs conversations entre eux. La
maîtrise de cette dernière est, à quelques exceptions près, limitée aux personnes de plus de cinquante ans, qui
optent souvent pour l’utilisation de l’espagnol même dans leurs interactions entre elles. J’ai principalement
rencontré des conversations en andoque lors de rares occasions où de certains aîné se sont rendus dans les
mambeaderos des autres. Les membres plus jeunes ont une compréhension passive de la langue native et sont
familiers avec divers concepts et termes dans la langue, des formules rituelles, et des noms de différentes espèces,
de personnes-maîtres, et de lieux. Cependant, cette connaissance est rarement accompagnée de la capacité à
engager des conversations en andoque, que ce soit sur des questions quotidiennes ou dans un contexte de
mambeadero. En raison de ces facteurs, j’ai abandonné mes tentatives d’apprendre l’andoque comme langue
parlée après les premières semaines de travail sur le terrain. Au lieu de cela, je me suis concentré sur des enquêtes
spécifiques sur des mots, des concepts, et des formules rituelles pertinents pour ma recherche, qui restent
reconnus et significatifs même pour ceux qui ne sont pas couramment en andoque. De plus, j’ai enregistré,
transcrit, et traduit divers chants cérémoniels et plusieurs mythes centraux dans la langue native avec l’aide des
individus andoque. Ces pratiques ont contribué à ma compréhension de cette langue et ont facilité la
compréhension passive de certaines conversations que j’ai rencontrées.
Dans mes conversations en espagnol avec des interlocuteurs, à la fois les âgés et les jeunes, j’ai cherché à
« contrôler les équivoques ». Cette approche, telle que définie par Viveiros de Castro, fait référence à la

634

conscience de deux locuteurs s’inscrivant dans différents registres ontologiques que le même signe partagé peut
en fait désigner différents objets dans chacun de ces registres (2004). Pour y parvenir, j’ai prêté une attention
particulière aux aspects sémantiques, pragmatiques et contextuels de leur utilisation de différents termes
espagnols. J’ai également demandé les termes andoque qu’ils utiliseraient si la conversation se déroulait dans
cette langue, ainsi que les messages nuancés que ces termes natifs pourraient véhiculer.
Or, il est important de reconnaître les limitations découlant de mon manque de compétence dans la langue
andoque. Cette limitation a empêché une recherche plus approfondie sur les étymologies, la morphologie et la
sémantique, ce qui aurait pu éclairer davantage les principaux concept et récits mythiques que j’ai analysés. De
plus, je n’ai pas pu prendre en compte l’utilisation par les membres des éléments pragmatiques cruciaux pour
établir l’autorité, tels que les modalités de connaissance à travers lesquelles les locuteurs indiquent leur relation à
l’information transmise (Landaburu 2007). Néanmoins, il convient de noter que ces formes d’établissement de
l’autorité sont peu utilisées à l’époque contemporaine en raison du déclin de l’utilisation de la langue native et
pourraient même ne pas être reconnues en tant que telles par de nombreux individus andoque qui possèdent une
connaissance limitée de la langue, ce qui pourrait en diminuer l’efficacité.
Une autre limitation découle de la restriction du travail sur le terrain à un seul groupe autochtone, qui fait partie
d’un réseau régional d’échanges avec d’autres acteurs autochtones et non-autochtones, tout en s’engageant
seulement marginalement avec des individus non-andoque. Ce biais ethnique a conduit à des informations
incomplètes et asymétriques concernant les échanges matrimoniaux et cérémoniels des Andoque avec leurs
voisins. Compléter ces informations avec des récits similaires de ces voisins aurait pu apporter davantage
d’éclaircissements sur le rôle des Andoque dans les dynamiques de pouvoir régionales.
Cette thèse présente un biais notable en termes de genre, puisque la majorité de mes interlocuteurs, en particulier
ceux qui ont consacré de longues heures à m’expliquer la cosmologie, le mythe et le rituel, étaient des hommes.
J’ai été rapidement accueilli dans leurs mambeaderos, où mon travail quotidien de préparation de la poudre de
coca m’a permis d’acquérir les connaissances qu’ils ont généreusement partagées. En revanche, j’ai rapidement
découvert qu’interagir avec des femmes jeunes ou mariées pouvait entraîner des inconvénients avec les membres
de leur famille, limitant ainsi mes conversations substantielles et détaillées avec des interlocutrices à deux aînés,
contrairement à la gamme d’âges plus large de mes interlocuteurs masculins. Malgré mes investigations sur le
travail au jardin et d’autres activités et connaissances féminines, l’absence d’une intégration complète dans ces
activités—semblable à mon implication dans les activités masculines—a résulté en une relative pénurie
d’informations sur ces sujets et sur les conceptions de pouvoir féminins qui leur sont incontestablement associés.
De plus, j’ai appris que les aspects pratiques des récits mythologiques donnent naissance à des versions
légèrement différentes adaptées aux individus de sexes distincts. En conséquence, je n’ai pas été exposé aux
mêmes versions de mythes partagées avec les filles avant le mariage, les femmes enceintes ou les jeunes mères. Il

635

est évident qu’une anthropologue femme aurait probablement accès à des informations différentes, qui pourraient
compléter ou remettre en question certaines de mes interprétations.
Bien que j’aie eu la chance d’être entouré à la fois de membres âgés et plus jeunes qui étaient généralement
disposés à partager leurs expériences et leurs perspectives, leur cosmopolitique de la connaissance imposait
souvent certaines limitations sur les informations qu’ils étaient prêts à divulguer. Je fais ici référence à la logique
discutée dans les chapitres 8 et 9, selon laquelle l’énonciation des noms d’entités puissantes, ou la narration de
récits mythiques et de chants cérémoniels invoquant de telles entités, nécessitent des procédures rituelles
spécifiques, voire même des bals cérémoniels ; sinon, ces entités pourraient se venger contre le locuteur ou sa
famille. Les références faites par les membres aux risques liés à la révélation de leurs mythes d’origine (comme
exploré au chapitre 10) ou aux autres membres ayant perdu des capacités spirituelles et rituelles après avoir
divulgué des connaissances sur différents mythes ou procédures rituelles à des chercheurs externes dans le passé
(comme discuté au chapitre 13), suggéraient que certaines informations m’avaient été cachées pour éviter des
vulnérabilités similaires ou une perte de pouvoir. En conséquence, j’ai évité de presser pour certains types
d’informations, tels que des formules de guérison spécifiques ou des procédures pour établir un contact avec des
personnes-maîtres. Pendant mon travail sur le terrain, j’ai respecté ces limites, guidé par une perspective similaire
à celle articulée par Rubenstein, qui a noté que « ma tâche en tant qu’anthropologue n’était pas de découvrir les
vérités derrière un secret mais de comprendre le pouvoir du secret » (2004, 1058). Certes, le processus d’analyse
des données collectées et d’écriture subséquente oblige l’ethnographe à explorer et à étendre les informations
fournies par les interlocuteurs en formulant des hypothèses et en dévoilant des schémas de pensée, d’action et de
narration dissimulés—des efforts motivés par notre « volonté de puissance » académique ainsi que notre désir
interconnecté de rendre le monde compréhensible et donc gouvernable, espérons-le à des fins légitimes. J’espère
que mon interprétation résultante est restée dans les limites fixées par mes amis et mes interlocuteurs andoque, et
qu’ils ne perçoivent pas cette recherche comme sapant le pouvoir même que j’ai cherché à étudier.

Première partie : Le pouvoir du centre
La structure de cette thèse reflète le rôle constitutif de l’espace dans la définition des conceptions et des
dynamiques de pouvoir andoque. La première partie explore le concept de « centre » (dʉi), en se demandant :
Comment le concept de « centre » imprègne-t-il et informe-t-il d’autres notions clés, éléments, pratiques et
institutions dans la société andoque qui sont pertinentes pour comprendre les conceptions de pouvoir andoque ?
Cette partie établit un lien entre la multivalence du concept de « centre » et deux registres d’échange, où la
compétence navigue et renforce le pouvoir : le système cannibale, dans lequel les personnes peuvent être
échangées entre elles, et le système de capitainerie, où les personnes sont interchangeables avec des objets non-

636

humains. La tension et le chevauchement partiel entre ces deux registres reflètent l’interaction et les convergences
entre deux strates mythologiques, mettant en évidence des idées contradictoires sur l’agentivité, soit disséminée
parmi les membres du groupe, soit principalement possédée par leurs capitaines. Cette partie explore également
les pratiques imprégnées de pouvoir de la familiarisation, à travers lesquelles les centres sont formés et les
individus sont façonnés en tant que membres de clans spécifiques et se voient attribués des origines claniques. En
examinant les différentes conceptions, éléments, pratiques et institutions associés au concept de « centre » dans
chaque système—allant du corps, du clan et du nom à la langue et aux axes—cette première partie offre une
topologie initiale de la notion de pouvoir au sein du cosmos andoque et de la société. Les observations de cette
partie serviront de base pour des discussions ultérieures dans le reste de la thèse.
Chapitre 1. L’univers des aigrettes et son centre
Ce chapitre révèle les éléments hétérosubstitutifs dans le socio-cosmos andoque en explorant le stratum
mythologique qui raconte les échanges et les conflits entre trois dieux aigrettes : Aigrette du Centre, qui incarne
l’autorité politique et la véritable leadership ; Aigrette de la Source de la Rivière, associée aux ancêtres et à
l’origine de la maloca et des cultures principales ; et Aigrette de l’Embouchure, associée aux personnes nonautochtones et à leurs biens importés, notamment leurs haches en métal et l’augmentation de la production
permise par ces instruments de travail et d’autres. Ce stratum mythologique laisse également entendre les efforts
du centre pour familiariser Aigrette de la Source et englober les forces qui lui sont associées—un effort inégalé
dans la relation entre le centre et l’embouchure, dont le dieu aigrette représentatif n’est jamais entièrement
familiarisé par le centre, qui reste dépendant des biens possédés par ce dieu. Dans la logique hétérosubstitutive
reflétée dans les mythes explorés, les êtres humains sont interchangeables avec les plantes cultivées ainsi qu’avec
les haches en métal et autres biens fabriqués à l’extérieur. D’un point de vue perspectif, les personnes au centre
sont des cultures du point de vue de la source de la rivière, tandis que, vues de l’embouchure, elles sont des biens.
Cependant, le centre dans le système de capitainerie hétérosubstitutif incarne également deux qualités qui reflètent
les conditions préalables à l’exercice du pouvoir : la capacité de refuser ou de suspendre l’échange, et le statut
d’être l’agent échangeur, plutôt que l’objet échangé. La suspension de l’échange est symbolisée par la hache en
pierre autochtone, qui représente l’autosuffisance économique, tandis que les haches en métal étaient
historiquement acquises en échange d’esclaves. La distinction entre l’objet échangé et l’agent échangeur est
exemplifiée par la distinction verticale entre les orphelins, qui étaient les individus échangés comme esclaves dans
le passé, et les capitaines, qui les échangeaient avec d’autres capitaines. Les orphelins, ainsi que les plantes
cultivées, représentent une agentivité diminuée par rapport à leurs capitaines ou cultivateurs, et les échanges
horizontales entre capitaines présument des relations verticales entre ceux-ci et leur orphelins/cultures.
Contrairement à la périodisation précédente de la consolidation de la mythologie des aigrettes à la reconstruction
post-génocide des Andoque, mon analyse suggère que l’univers des aigrettes représente l’idéologie de la traite des

637

esclaves pré-génocide et la dimension de la commerce hétérosubstitutive en cours entre les entités humaines et
non-humaines.
Chapitre 2. Le cosmos prédateur et son centre
Les capacités prédatrices sont essentielles pour déterminer la direction et la nature asymétrique des échanges
divers au sein de la réalité andoque, et celles-là sont envisagées comme différentiellement distribuées à travers
l’espace. Ce chapitre explore le système fluvial homosubstitutif-cannibale, où la capacité prédatrice est
directement liée à la proximité de la source de la rivière et l’élévation, tandis qu’une proximité plus grande de
l’embouchure et une élévation plus basse signalent un statut de proie. Ce système est perspectiviste : vu de
l’amont, l’on est perçu comme une proie, tandis que, vu de l’aval, l’on est un prédateur. Le centre de la rivière est
habité par des êtres humains qui sont à la fois des prédateurs et des proies. La personne et l’agentivité, essentielles
pour évaluer les dynamiques de pouvoir, sont inextricablement liées aux capacités prédatrices dans le système
cannibale. Dans la langue andoque, le terme désignant la personne, ño̰, se réfère à tout être doté d’agentivité et
d’intentionnalité. Celles-ci sont incarnées par les prédateurs, tels que le jaguar et l’aigle, de sorte que les êtres
humains ne sont pas l’humanité ultime, rendant le perspectivisme des Andoque moins substantiel que celui
documenté chez d’autres Peuples du Centre. La conception d’homosubstitution qui prévaut dans le cosmos
cannibale rend possible la compensation du corps et de la vie d’une personne, humaine ou autre, par le corps et la
vie d’une autre personne. Les deux qualités nécessaires pour exercer le pouvoir incarnées par le centre du système
cannibale—la suspension de l’échange et l’engagement en tant qu’agent échangeant plutôt que patient échangé—
s’expriment à travers l’idiome du corps. La première qualité est représentée par le corps mature (yo) d’un adulte,
capable de participer à l’échange cannibale en tant que prédateur puissant, contrairement au corps sous-développé
d’un enfant, le statut de jeunesse étant associé à l’orphelinat et donc à la vulnérabilité et l’échangeabilité. La
capacité de parole incarne la suspension de l’échange prédateur par le centre. Contrairement à l’agentivité dénotée
par ño̰, hɵ́ihɵ́, « être humain », évoque l’idée de ressemblance, qui permet la socialité. On est humain aux yeux
des autres dans la mesure où l’on peut dialoguer avec eux et où son corps et le leur sont soumis aux mêmes forces
de disparition et de décomposition. Le système de capitainerie hétérosubstitutif précédemment discuté est
superposé au système cannibale homosubstitutif et le chevauche partiellement. Chaque système articule
différemment les processus de prédation, de familiarisation et d’échange, avec des séquences différentes
d’intégration de l’agentivité d’autrui : tandis que le système homosubstitutif implique une prédation suivie de la
familiarisation, le système hétérosubstitutif implique une familiarisation suivie d’un échange, qui peut avoir des
implications prédatrices mais ne doit pas être réduit à une simple prédation.
Chapitre 3. La production de centres

638

Le centre des deux systèmes fluviaux, discuté dans les chapitres précédents, doit être activement produit, un
processus exploré dans le chapitre présent. Le chapitre commence par discuter des conceptions interconnectés de
formation, d’origine et de clan. Les origines et la formation des personnes peuvent être retracées à deux processus
: la formation physique et l’attribution à un clan par la remise de nom. Comme les Andoque n’ont pas de mythe
d’origine unificateur, les unités sociales pertinentes pour retracer les origines au sein de la société sont les clans
patrilinéaires. Chaque clan a un mythe d’origine différente et un lieu d’où ses membres sont censés être sortis.
L’origine personnifie le processus de la formation du collectif, tandis que l’animal, la plante ou l’élément naturel
désigné par le nom du clan fonctionne de manière totémique, son mythe d’origine et ses autres caractéristiques
servant de source de noms pour les membres du clan et de ressource pour la protection, la guérison ou le soutien
de ceux-ci. Ensuite, le chapitre examine les pratiques imprégnées de pouvoir par lesquelles un nouveau-né est
façonné en personne à corps humain et devient membre d’un centre clanique spécifique. Cela se fait
principalement par le biais de la remise de nom, ɵti, qui est un moment puissant de familiarisation où un enfant se
voit conférer une origine clanique, devenant ainsi intégré au récit d’origine du clan et doté de la reconnaissance et
des dispositions qui lui serviront à engager des échanges bénéfiques futurs. Le verbe ɵti signifie également
« former », et la remise de nom représente un acte puissant de subjectivation, par lequel une personne façonne une
autre en lui conférant des comportements, des caractéristiques, des capacités et des défenses spécifiques. Les
noms de clan sont considérés comme « réels », plus prestigieux que les noms « ordinaires », et susceptibles de
donner à leurs porteurs un plus grand accès au pouvoir et au leadership s’ils sont attribués lors de plusieurs danses
cérémonielles, divisées en deux spécialisations rituelles, « rouge » et « blanche », avec lesquelles l’enfant nommé
est identifié à partir de ce moment. Grâce à sa répétition dans la cérémonie et la consommation de substances
rituelles par les participants, le nom devient largement connu par des membres du groupe et des personnes-maîtres
du territoire. Cet acte de parole performatif solidifie le rattachement de l’enfant à un centre humain. Tandis que
les femmes jouent un rôle important dans la fabrication physique de leurs enfants, les liant au groupe humain, la
remise de nom représente une pratique supplémentaire de familiarisation, dont le pouvoir de l’exécution est
principalement détenu par les hommes. Néanmoins, toute erreur commise lors de cette cérémonie peut mettre
l’enfant en danger. Suite à la discussion de la création d’un centre par le biais de telles pratiques de
« familiarisation descendante » telles que la nomination et la formation physique, le chapitre se termine par une
brève discussion de la « familiarisation ascendante »—par laquelle on peut étendre son centre dans certaines
situations, en y incluant des individus plus âgés que soi, qui sont à la fois potentiellement dangereux et
bénéfiques. Deux pratiques pour y parvenir sont l’évitement de nom et l’utilisation de termes de parenté
consanguine. Ces pratiques reflètent une reconnaissance du pouvoir et de la connaissance supérieurs des aînés,
avec l’intention implicite d’obtenir leur protection et leurs soins. En revanche, l’emploi de leurs noms claniques
peut signaler une intention intrusive sur l’individu nommé, tandis que l’utilisation de termes affins peut susciter
une attitude hostile et prédatrice de la part de l’aîné.

639

Chapitre 4. Le centre réapparaît après le déluge
Ce chapitre examine un processus crucial de formation du centre dans l’histoire récente des Andoque, en posant la
question suivante : Comment les conceptions de centre et de sa formation éclairent-elles la récupération des
Andoque des ravages infligés par les agents de la Casa Arana, et quelle signification le système fluvial de
capitainerie et celui cannibale, ainsi que les conceptions d’échange et de pouvoir de chacun, revêtaient-ils pour
eux au cours de ce processus ? Ce processus inclut les premières tentatives de reconstitution sous le capitaine
andoque Dóñékɒi dans les années 1910–1920 ; la déportation de la majorité de son groupe en 1928, et le
regroupement ultérieur des survivants andoque dans la seconde moitié des années 1930. Sous l’égide de Yiñékɒ,
le fils de Dóñékɒi, ils reconstruisirent l’Andoque en tant que groupe linguistique et ethnique solidement établi sur
leur territoire ancestral. Mon analyse dans ce chapitre concorde largement avec celle de Jon Landaburu sur les
transformations post-génocide des Andoque, tout en l’enrichissant et la nuançant. Je soutiens que Dóñékɒi a
souligné l’importance de la collaboration et de l’échange avec les agents non-autochtones cruciaux pour la
récupération du peuple andoque. Les efforts ultérieurs de Yiñékɒ, qui a assumé la mission de créer ce centre, ont
reconnu que le système spatial principal pour ce centre est le système de capitainerie, plutôt que le système
cannibale. Néanmoins, Yiñékɒ a également reconnu l’importance des capacités prédatrices liées au système
cannibale, même s’il considérait lui-même et les autres survivants comme des orphelins, se trouvant dans une
position inférieure et vulnérable dans ce système. À travers une analyse des versions concurrentes du mythe du
« Déluge des orphelins », je soutiens que l’emploi par Yiñékɒ des récits mythiques préexistants révèle une
tentative non pas de simplement remplacer les anciens dieux, comme le suggère Landaburu, mais de gagner accès
à leur agentivité et capacités prédatrices afin de sortir du statut d’orphelinat. Le chapitre explore également les
dimensions prédatrices du bal cérémoniel de l’arbre multiplicateur, considérées comme essentielles pour stimuler
la croissance démographique après le génocide. Cette analyse est suivie par une discussion sur les facteurs de
parenté, rituels et économiques qui ont permis à Yiñékɒ de s’établir en tant que noyau du groupe de survivants, et
les mesures qu’il a prises entre les années 1930 et 1950 pour façonner un centre unifié, exercer un contrôle sur les
autres et les familiariser en intégrant leurs agentivité à la sienne. Enfin, j’identifie des moments historiques
spécifiques qui ont marqué ou influencé la dissolution de ce centre à partir des années 1960. Ces moments, qui
peuvent être tracés sur les deux systèmes fluviaux, ont sapé les jalons de l’autorité de Yiñékɒ, qui reposait sur le
contrôle du travail et de l’échange avec les Blancs, sa revendication de supériorité au sein du Clan Aigle, et sa
capacité à contraindre les autres à s’aligner avec sa vision. Le récit historique de cette période cruciale pour les
Andoque présenté dans ce chapitre servira de toile de fond dans la discussion de dynamiques de pouvoir dans les
chapitres suivants.

Deuxième Partie : Le pouvoir approprié de la source de la rivière

640

Dans la partie précédente, les cultures et les connaissances apportées par Aigrette de la Source de la Rivière au
centre sont considérées comme des éléments constitutifs de l’identité, du pouvoir et de l’autorité de ceux qui y
vivent. Dans cette partie, j’explore les quatre éléments principaux apportés par cette figure mythique : la maloca
et ses instruments, le manioc, le tabac et la coca. Je me concentre sur les capacités qu’ils confèrent aux habitants
du centre pour participer à des échanges asymétriques bénéfiques avec des êtres humains et non-humains, ainsi
que sur le pouvoir spirituel, le tne’túi, auquel ils donnent accès, et que mes interlocuteurs masculins citent souvent
comme la traduction, dans la langue andoque, du mot espagnol poder (pouvoir). Le centre acquiert accès aux
forces liées à la source de la rivière et contenues dans ces éléments par la familiarisation de ces éléments et des
entités spirituelles qui les maîtrisent. Les forces de la source de la rivière sont associées à sa position dans les
deux systèmes cosmo-économiques explorés dans la partie précédente : les systèmes de capitainerie et cannibale.
De même, les éléments explorés dans cette partie, une fois que leurs personnes-maîtres sont familiarisées,
confèrent à leurs utilisateurs une agentivité prédatrice et les servent dans des échanges avec d’autres affins, y
compris ceux associés à l’embouchure de la rivière. Alors que l’ethnographie amazonienne a largement discuté de
l’alimentation et de la manipulation des termes de parenté comme moyens de familiariser des affins, cette partie
se concentre sur une autre forme de familiarisation à travers la narration de mythes. Étant donné l’accent mis par
les Andoque sur les identités claniques patrilinéaires, je fais référence à ce processus comme une « agnatisation »
pour mettre en évidence les tentatives de subsumer les échanges affins dans le projet de continuité et de
reproduction agnatique. Enfin, cette partie démontre que, bien que la familiarisation à travers les substances
explorées fonctionne dans une logique de don, ces substances renvoient finalement au principe prédateur du
cosmos—la divinité carnivore Sḭ́ di située en amont.
Chapitre 5. La maloca
La maloca est une institution centrale qui combine des fonctions résidentielles, sociales, cérémonielles et
politiques. Un capitaine habile qui converse avec des êtres non-humains à son mambeadero, l’espace de
consommation de coca au sein de la maloca, peut gérer et intervenir dans les sites du territoire ancestral. À travers
les rituels tenus dans la maloca, les gens transforment des aliments potentiellement nuisibles en substances
vivifiantes et négocient avec des personnes-maîtres puissantes pour éviter les maladies, les accidents et d’autres
formes de prédation par ces entités, favorisant ainsi le bien-être du groupe et sa reproduction sociale. Pour
explorer le pouvoir incarné dans la maloca, ma discussion se concentre sur la maloca en tant qu’assemblage
hétérogène d’êtres humains et non-humains, dont l’intégration de l’agentivité permet au capitaine de gérer le
territoire et de naviguer entre les dangers et opportunités externes. Aigrette de la Source de la Rivière, qui a créé
la première maloca, et Sḭ́ di, son prédécesseur carnivore de l’amont, sont deux maîtres puissants que toute
personne doit familiariser et maîtriser afin de devenir un capitaine au centre. On dit que Sḭ́ di protège les malocas
modélisées d’après celle construite par Aigrette de la Source de la Rivière, dévorant ceux qui souhaitent leur

641

nuire. Les différentes parties de la maloca et ses principaux instruments incarnent des esprits puissants d’entités
non-humaines qui défendent la maison et le groupe et soutiennent les actions du capitaine, ainsi que des figures
mythiques avec lesquelles le capitaine communique pour obtenir du soutien. Les capitaines et les habitants de la
maloca pratiquent une « familiarisation ascendante » envers ces entités en utilisant des termes de parenté de
séniorité relative pour invoquer ces éléments pour leur protection et leur assistance, mettant leurs capacités à leur
disposition. La maloca apparaît ainsi comme une entité magnifiée, comprenant diverses personnes et des relations
hétérogènes qui ne peuvent pas être réduites à ses habitants humains. À son tour, la maloca magnifie ses
constituants humains, une magnification qui atteint son apogée avec le propriétaire de la maloca pour qui les
forces et les capacités des différents constituants de la maloca sont les plus accessibles, lui permettant d’intégrer
leur agentivité à la sienne pour atteindre le bien-être et protéger son peuple. Le capitaine est aussi le maître de son
peuple—les résidents et les travailleurs de la maloca, sa capacité à intégrer l’agentivité des travailleurs à la sienne
étant l’équivalent interhumain des relations de domination par la familiarisation qu’il entretient avec les
composantes non-humaines de la maloca.
Chapitre 6. Les cultures principales
Dans ce chapitre, j’explore les trois cultures auxquelles les Andoque, comme d’autres Peuples du Centre,
accordent une importance particulière—à savoir, le manioc, le tabac et la coca. Bien que, dans la mythologie,
toutes les plantes domestiquées aient été apportées de la source de la rivière pour nourrir les êtres humains au lieu
des plantes sauvages qui sont restées pour les animaux, ces trois cultures sont les plus identifiées comme
convenant vraiment aux êtres humains. Comme chez les peuples voisins, ces plantes sont intimement liées aux
origines des êtres humains. Elles sont associées aux substances corporelles humaines et sont considérées comme
incarnant leurs qualités, et leur préparation et leur consommation adéquates sont censées permettre la formation
de véritables êtres humains. Cela distingue les humains des animaux et les protège de l’environnement forestier
hostile. Ce chapitre discute des capacités que chaque plante confère à ses producteurs et consommateurs, ainsi que
du processus de familiarisation en deux étapes entourant ces plantes, où la capacité de façonner les subjectivités
des autres pour le meilleur ou pour le pire, d’influencer leurs actions, et de participer à des échanges bénéfiques
dépend de la maîtrise de la plante et des entités non-humaines associées. Je commence par examiner le manioc et
le pouvoir qu’il confère aux femmes élaborant différents produits à partir de celui-ci, y compris le pain de casabe
et surtout la boisson de manicuera. L’élaboration de dérivés de manioc par les femmes crée une dépendance
vitale. Grâce à cette production, les femmes peuvent influencer les autres, les fabriquant comme des consanguins,
qui se comporteraient favorablement envers elles et leurs parents. La manicuera incarne en particulier la capacité
de la femme à agir sur les autres par la manipulation du manioc. Elle est considérée comme la substance
caractéristique des femmes, car la quantité et la qualité de manicuera qu’une femme sert attestent de sa valeur,
cette boisson agissant sur les autres par ses aspects régénératifs et vitaux. Cependant, les changements historiques
dans les modes de préparation et de consommation du manioc, ainsi que les changements démographiques au sein

642

de la communauté, ont réduit la centralité des femmes dans la production de manioc et leur accès au pouvoir
découlant de la fourniture de dérivés de manioc. En outre, la mythologie fait allusion à un idéal agnatique selon
lequel, lors du mariage, le travail de manioc d’une femme devrait être adapté aux besoins de son mari et de ses
futurs enfants, car ils appartiennent à un clan différent. Alors que la production de manioc est principalement une
activité et un domaine de maîtrise féminins, les deux autres plantes principales que le centre a reçues de la source
de la rivière—la coca et le tabac—sont traitées et maîtrisées par les hommes. La coca et le tabac partagent de
nombreuses similitudes, en particulier leur association avec Sḭ́ di et l’accès qu’ils donnent au tne’túi, l’esprit
auxiliaire transmis par ce dieu carnivore qui réside en amont. Les substances élaborées des deux plantes sont
censées refléter les pensées et les intentions de la personne qui les a cultivées et préparées ; elles sont essentielles
pour le leadership, et elles confèrent à leurs utilisateurs le pouvoir de familiariser les autres dans une gamme de
contextes allant de la guérison à la sorcellerie en passant par l’initiation. Cette familiarisation présente à la fois
des aspects prédateurs et défensifs. Cependant, les deux substances diffèrent dans les nuances qu’elles mettent en
avant dans ce processus : le tabac est imprégné de connotations prédatrices plus marquées, tandis que la coca est
considérée comme plus défensive. La connotation défensive de la coca se reflète dans le rôle principal de la
poudre de coca, selon les Andoque, de favoriser la pensée humaine véritable, et ainsi de les protéger d’asymétries
défavorables avec des affins humains et non-humains, plutôt que d’engendrer des paroles et de faciliter leurs
échanges avec des affins, comme c’est le cas chez les peuples voisins. La familiarisation entourant ces substances
est, en fait, double, car l’influence sur le destinataire humain ou non-humain dépend de la soumission à la volonté
du donneur de la plante et de son personne-maître, qui proviennent du domaine affinal. Cette dynamique est à la
fois inscrite dans la mythologie et reproduite pendant le processus de préparation, à travers des mesures telles que
la retenue sexuelle et l’ajout de sel végétal (à la pâte de tabac) et de cendres de yarumo (à la poudre de coca), deux
substances associées au sperme. Ces mesures peuvent être considérées comme des moyens supplémentaires par
lesquels ces plantes puissantes sont agnatisées, garantissant que les échanges affinaux sont englobés par l’identité
agnatique, et non l’inverse ; en d’autres termes, que leurs dérivés renforcent les paroles et les actes de leur
producteur, plutôt que les intentions extérieures, telles que celles des personnes-maîtres originaux des plantes,
transmettant des résultats bénéfiques pour le producteur et son clan, et concordantes avec son origine. Avec les
trois cultures, l’acte de partage qui active leur efficacité implique une logique de don, où une partie du producteurdonneur passe au destinataire-consommateur et l’affecte. Cette dimension métonymique est soutenue par l’idée
d’hétérosubstitution selon laquelle les humains peuvent être remplacés par les substances qu’ils produisent et
offrent à d’autres. Dans certains contextes, ces offrandes peuvent être utilisées pour chasser d’autres de manière
homosubstitutive. Par conséquent, l’interaction entre ces deux logiques de substitution souligne la dialectique du
don et de la prédation dans les interactions cosmo-sociales andoque.
Chapitre 7. Tne’túi: Le pouvoir en tant qu’esprit

643

Dans ce chapitre, j’examine le tne’túi, l’esprit transmis par Sḭ́ di, le dieu carnivore de l’amont. Bien que
littéralement traduit par les Andoque en espagnol comme poder (pouvoir), le tne’túi est mieux compris comme
l’esprit auxiliaire qui peut se mettre à la disposition des individus. Pour explorer cette faculté, je discute des deux
autres composantes de la personne : premièrement, le mo̰no̰i, ou « âme », qui est la composante passive la plus
vulnérable de la personne, pouvant ainsi être blessé ou dévoré par d’autres, et qui englobe les traits superficiels de
la personne et ses habitudes ; deuxièmement, le yono̰píi, ou « esprit tutélaire », une faculté substantielle dont la
force varie d’une personne à l’autre, et qui protège son propriétaire, génère des pensées, articule la parole, permet
la planification d’actions et facilite l’expérience des rêves. La force du yono̰píi est déterminée par son degré
d’accès à l’esprit auxiliaire tne’túi, une faculté externe à la personne et caractérisée par la compétence, la maturité
et la collaboration de la foi, de la pensée, de la mémoire et de l’attention de cette personne. Le tne’túi peut être
compris comme une fréquence par laquelle Sı̰ ́di transmet des connaissances à la fois aux êtres humains et nonhumains, transmettant des renseignements sur le cosmos prédateur à ceux qui sont sensibles à cette fréquence et
améliorant leur conscience de la logique le régissant. En examinant la relation entre le tne’túi et le yono̰píi, je
montre comment les gens accèdent à l’esprit auxiliaire par la familiarisation de Sḭ́ di, utilisant ainsi ses capacités et
ses connaissances à leur propre usage. Plus une personne s’engage dans la chasse ou dans la sorcellerie, plus elle
fournit de la subsistance à Sı̰ ́di à travers ses proies, renforçant ainsi davantage son contrôle sur lui. Le résultat de
la familiarisation de Sı̰ ́di est la possession d’un fort esprit tutélaire, yono̰píi. L’interaction entre l’esprit auxiliaire
et l’esprit tutélaire, qui confère un pouvoir spirituel aux personnes, représente donc une autre manifestation de
l’établissement de relations de maîtrise des agents puissants de la source de la rivière par le centre. Pour
comprendre la nature de ce pouvoir spirituel et son fonctionnement, le chapitre examine ensuite les deux facultés
qui servent de principaux blocs de construction ainsi que ses manifestations dans la vie des gens : l’interprétation
des présages et les rêves. La logique de l’interprétation de présages et de rêves découle de l’idée selon laquelle le
visible est déterminé par l’invisible. La bonne interaction entre l’esprit tutélaire et l’esprit auxiliaire permet à la
personne de s’harmoniser efficacement avec le domaine invisible du mythe et des esprits, de sorte que l’esprit
d’une personne puissante peut participer activement aux événements de ce domaine, plutôt que d’être pris au
dépourvu ou influencé en tant que victime passive lorsque les événements se déroulent dans le monde visible et
physique. Dans le cas des présages constatifs, qui communiquent des informations sur des états de réalité établis,
les individus dotés d’un esprit puissant sont ceux qui les perçoivent, savent les interpréter et se protègent euxmêmes et leurs proches en conséquence. Dans le cas des présages performatifs, les individus dotés d’un esprit
puissant s’abstiennent de produire des actions qui pourraient déclencher des calamités. Ensuite, je démontre
qu’au-delà de refléter l’étendue du pouvoir spirituel d’un individu, les rêves peuvent également être manipulés par
ceux qui exercent une autorité spirituelle significative. Cela découle du fait que les actions que les gens
entreprennent par rapport aux rêves, quelle que soit leur clé d’interprétation—leur encadrement, leur rejet ou
même leur sollicitation—dépendent de leur force spirituelle et peuvent, en même temps, l’augmenter ou la

644

diminuer. Un indicateur important de la compétence spirituelle d’une personne réside dans sa capacité à rejeter les
rêves sinistres ou à détourner les malheurs qu’ils prédisent, parfois en transférant la calamité à des personnes
vivant ailleurs.

Troisième Partie : Le pouvoir dans un cosmos de centres multiples
Dans cette partie de la thèse, je pose les deux questions suivantes : Quelles sont les dynamiques de pouvoir entre
les centres humains et entre eux et les centres non-humains, et comment les asymétries dans les échanges entre les
centres humains sont-elles articulées avec les asymétries dans les échanges avec les centres non-humains ?
L’introduction aborde la littérature ethnographique existante sur l’analogie dans l’Amazonie autochtone entre les
relations interhumaines et les relations humaines-non-humaines, explorant les objections à une telle approche
dans le cas des Peuples du Centre en raison de leur perception d’une asymétrie ontologique entre les humains et
les non-humains. En revanche, ma discussion dans les chapitres suivants démontre que, pour les Andoque, les
relations entre les centres humains et celles qui impliquent à la fois des centres humains et non-humains sont
analogiques en ce sens que toutes deux sont gouvernées par des logiques prédatrices. En outre, ces deux types de
relations sont continues, car la prédation par une catégorie (que ce soit des êtres humains ou des non-humains)
facilite la prédation par l’autre. De plus, plutôt que de considérer l’asymétrie humain-non-humain comme donnée,
mon analyse met en évidence le continuum entre la prédation et la familiarisation, cette dernière émergeant
comme un moment asymétrique qui constitue les centres humains et non-humains participant à l’échange
prédateur. Étant donné que la familiarisation représente un continuum de relations asymétriques, allant de la
neutralisation des dangers inhérents aux affins à leur manipulation pour diverses fins, cette partie offre de
nouvelles perspectives sur l’asymétrie ontologique parmi les Peuples du Centre à travers une analyse des
différentes positions le long de ce continuum que l’on adopte à la fois envers les affins humains et non-humains,
réels ou potentiels.
Chapitre 8. Le territoire et ses personnes
Dans ce chapitre, j’aborde la question suivante : Qu’est-ce que le territoire ancestral, comment est-il défini, et qui
sont les agents sociaux et politiques qui y opèrent ? Le principal concept pour désigner le territoire chez les
Andoque est ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí. Le chapitre part d’une contradiction apparente dans la considération des Andoque de leur
ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí comme la connectivité entre une myriade d’êtres humains et non-humains, avec des espèces, des sites et
d’autres éléments possédés par des personnes-maîtres non-humaines, d’une part, et leur affirmation de la
supériorité humaine sur les entités non-humaines dans ce territoire et de leur capacité à en disposer comme des
ressources, d’autre part. Je discute cette contradiction apparente en plusieurs étapes. Tout d’abord, j’explore la
notion de personnes-maîtres en tant que personnification des sites et des espèces qu’elles protègent, ainsi que leur

645

potentiel nocif pour les humains et les procédures typiques de communication avec elles. Ensuite, j’examine la
conception andoque de la multiplicité des mondes/territoires, chacun étant régi par une autre origine et une autre
logique de connectivité. Je montre comment le discours de la notion de territoire comme connectivité permet
l’exclusion de groupes humains concurrents du territoire, cette exclusion étant exprimée à travers l’idiome de la
gestion correcte des relations avec les personnes-maîtres de ce territoire. Ensuite, je montre que l’utilisation
contemporaine du terme territorio par les Andoque ne peut être dissociée des processus de mobilisation politique
autochtone et de reconnaissance des terres et des droits par l’État au cours des dernières décennies. La
participation des Andoque dans des campagnes pour sécuriser les droits fonciers a été influencée par le discours
territorial précédent et leurs pratiques de maintien de relations avec des entités non-humaines, mais elle a
également affecté les façons dont les gens conçoivent leur territoire et perçoivent leur position par rapport à ces
entités. La reconnaissance territoriale par l’État, ainsi que la tentative des Andoque de l’acquérir ou de la
maintenir, reflète une nouvelle relation à la terre, qui démontre l’intériorisation des définitions euro-américaines
du territoire en tant que zone de propriété exclusive et de droits d’usage par un groupe de personnes. Bien que
nous puissions considérer le territoire à la lumière de cette discussion comme un objet indéterminé pour les
Andoque, à la fois la propriété de certains humains qui disposent de ses composantes non-humaines comme des
ressources et la connectivité entre plusieurs classes d’êtres et de propriétaires, je propose de l’interpréter comme
inhérent à la version asymétrique de l’animisme à laquelle les Andoque souscrivent. Ainsi, dans la dernière partie
de ce chapitre, je me tourne vers la version andoque du perspectivisme et du multinaturalisme. Je soutiens que,
contrairement au modèle de Viveiros de Castro, dans le perspectivisme des Andoque, le monde et l’ontologie ne
sont pas synonymes, car les mondes devraient être compris comme des lieux ou des dimensions où les ontologies
sont stabilisées. Contrairement à l’hypothèse formulée par les partisans de la thèse du multiple-monde selon
laquelle chaque individu appartient exclusivement à un monde ou une réalité particulière, je soutiens que la
description andoque des chevauchements entre certains mondes indique les origines multiples de certains êtres et
leur capacité correspondante à adhérer à plusieurs logiques de connectivité, ou plusieurs mondes. Cela nous
conduit à la possibilité d’un englobement d’un monde par un autre. Cette forme de chevauchement reflète une
dynamique asymétrique car un tel englobement signifie l’englobement de l’origine d’un monde par un autre.
Ensuite, les habitants du second possèdent la capacité d’exercer leur domination sur leurs relations avec les
habitants du premier, en s’appuyant sur leur familiarité avec ces mythes d’origine. Je suggère que les Andoque
tentent d’amener l’englobement des mondes non-humains par leur propre ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, établissant ainsi et maintenant
une asymétrie humaine-non-humaine. L’évocation du « Créateur » apparaît comme un outil cosmopolitique pour
produire l’asymétrie territoriale souhaitée. Elle souligne que toute forme de connectivité, y compris celle de
ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí, est perçue du point de vue d’un être spécifique qui cherche à affirmer sa domination et à englober les
perspectives concurrentes en son sein. Enfin, je soutiens que le territoire n’est pas homogène en ce qui concerne
sa susceptibilité à être dominé par les êtres humains ou à reconnaître leur position supérieure, comme en

646

témoignent les explications des Andoque sur les deux types de proto-humains qui ont nommé les ruisseaux et
autres sites dans le territoire et différaient dans leur mode d’action sur les autres entités de leur environnement :
les Ombres et les Perceurs. Étant donné que les Perceurs ont opéré dans une zone où les Andoque ne se sont
approchés que relativement récemment, alors que les Ombres vivaient là où les clans andoque résidaient dans un
passé plus lointain, je suggère que les récits sur les Perceurs ont été développés lors de l’expansion ou du
déplacement des clans andoque vers le Caquetá et de leur engagement croissant dans le commerce avec des
marchands non-autochtones. Cette hypothèse fournit un autre exemple de la façon dont les notions des Andoque
sur la domination humaine sur la terre et ses cohabitants non-humains non seulement coexistent avec leur
ontologie animiste mais en découlent également, en s’appuyant sur sa tendance inhérente à l’asymétrie tout en
approfondissant davantage cette inclination.
Chapitre 9. Le pouvoir dans les relations humains-non-humains
Ce chapitre aborde la question suivante : Comment le pouvoir est-il exercé dans les relations entre les centres
humains et non-humains qui constituent ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí ? Le chapitre offre une vue panoramique de ces relations,
démontrant comment les schémas symétriques de prédation se transforment en relations asymétriques de
familiarisation et de maîtrise. Une dimension importante de la domination explorée ici est la capacité de chacun à
incorporer les autres dans sa propre réalité, dont une version centrale dans le contexte amazonien est la
familiarisation. Suite à une description de la prédation par les humains sous forme de chasse et de pêche, je
discute de la manière dont les non-humains se nourrissent des humains et les transforment en leurs parents par le
biais de maladies, d’accidents et d’autres maux, et, finalement, par la mort. Les Andoque perçoivent une
hiérarchie d’agentivité parmi les êtres non-humains, influencée par l’odeur émise par différentes espèces et, de
manière plus générale, basée sur une corrélation entre la position relative de chaque espèce dans la chaîne
alimentaire, sa taille corporelle, et sa capacité à se nourrir de ses mangeurs et à les familiariser par les voies
mentionnées ci-dessous. De cette manière, les Andoque considèrent les super-prédateurs comme les plus agentifs,
suivis par les humains et d’autres êtres qui sont à la fois proies et prédateurs, puis les grands animaux de chasse, et
ensuite les plus petits et les poissons. Dans cette hiérarchie, les plantes sauvages sont jugées moins agentives, et
les plantes cultivées occupent la base de la pyramide. Une telle gradation de l’agentivité, observée parmi d’autres
sociétés amazoniennes, révèle une dimension hiérarchique souvent négligée de l’animisme régional, constituant
ainsi une toile de fond sur laquelle divers acteurs, y compris les spécialistes rituels humains, peuvent effectuer des
manœuvres ontologiques pour manipuler l’agentivité des autres, par exemple, en transformant la victime en fruit
ou en un animal de chasse relativement vulnérable. En discutant de la prédation par les non-humains, je m’oppose
aux interprétations moralisatrices répandues des conceptions de maladie parmi les Peuples du Centre qui
considèrent le discours autochtone sur la maladie et la prédation comme une réflexion sur le comportement
asocial et immoral des gens. En revanche, mon analyse montre comment l’immoralité est englobée dans des

647

préoccupations plus larges concernant la prédation par les non-humains, avec le discours moral souvent au service
d’une logique prédatrice. En focalisant sur le mode d’action de plusieurs êtres non-humains dont les attaques sont
considérées comme particulièrement fatales, et qui favorisent la séduction sexuelle de leurs victimes humaines, je
souligne la primauté de l’effort des Andoque pour prévenir la prédation symétrique, car ce mode d’action est
parallèle aux techniques de chasse humaines qui exploitent les instincts reproducteurs du gibier. Ainsi, plutôt que
de considérer ces maladies prédatrices comme des expressions d’inquiétude concernant une conduite sexuelle
inappropriée, je montre que la réceptivité sexuelle, qu’elle soit chez les agents humains ou non-humains, rend cet
agent vulnérable à la prédation par d’autres, car elle marque sa susceptibilité à être emporté par des principes
affins étrangers au lieu de rester fidèle à son « centre » véritable. Cela appelle à une formulation plus dialectique,
où tout comme les êtres non-humains incarnent différents vices, s’engager dans ces vices peut amener les gens à
partager un corps et une conscience similaires à ceux de ces êtres. La conscience et l’autocontrôle émergent donc
comme critiques pour éviter les échanges désavantageux avec d’autres centres et pour gagner une position plus
avantageuse pour contrôler ces échanges. De plus, en examinant les récits andoque sur les êtres fi’du, ou diablos,
une catégorie d’êtres qui favorisent également ce mode d’action de séduction sexuelle, et en m’appuyant sur la
théorie psychanalytique de Lacan, je suggère que ces êtres sont perçus comme particulièrement puissants et
dangereux parce qu’ils n’ont pas été symbolisés et communiqués aux autres et à soi-même, restant des parties du
registre Réel de la réalité, et donc de l’inconscient, comme un surplus d’altérité. Le chapitre continue ensuite par
une exploration de la manière dont les gens s’oppose à ces tentatives de prédation de familiarisation par les nonhumains, et comment ils forment des relations de maîtrise qui leur permettent d’intégrer les pouvoirs des
compagnons non-humains pour leurs propres fins chamaniques. J’examine les divers modes selon lesquels des
offrandes sont faites aux êtres non-humains. Alors que certaines offrandes, appelées ɵpáha, fonctionnent selon
une logique hétérosubstitutive pour remplacer la vie animale et humaine par des substances végétales, d’autres
offrandes, incluses dans la catégorie plus large de ḭtasé, aident le donneur à imposer au récipiendaire une
perception de la réalité qui sert ses propres intérêts. L’apaisement des êtres non-humains (sḭ́ ), souvent mentionné
comme un objectif principal des offrandes, signifie un passage de l’homosubstitution à l’hétérosubstitution, ou
d’une relation de prédation, dans laquelle la personne-maître pourrait chercher à se venger de la partie humaine, à
une relation de commerce, dans laquelle elle ne le ferait pas. Les offrandes permettent ainsi aux humains d’éviter
de réciproquer leur propre vie pour celle qu’ils ont prise et peuvent être considérées comme des cadeaux qui
fonctionnent dans un cadre de relations prédatrices. Sur la base de ma discussion, dans la première partie de cette
thèse, portant sur les différents niveaux d’agentivité, de soumission et d’aliénation caractérisant les compagnons,
les orphelins et les plantes cultivées, je suggère que la modalité ḭtasé établit et maintient une relation maîtrecompagnon entre l’offrant et le récipiendaire, qui devient, dans une certaine mesure, un compagnon agentif et une
extension de l’offrant. En revanche, la modalité ɵpáha représente un échange d’orphelins/cultures beaucoup
moins agentifs et plus aliénables entre deux capitaines—l’un étant humain et l’autre non-humain. Ensuite, je

648

discute de la relation asymétrique et volatile des Andoque avec un type puissant de compagnons non-humains :
les esprits sur lesquels le chaman s’appuie pour diverses fins, et dont leurs agentivités il cherche à intégrer dans la
sienne par la familiarisation. Potentiellement plus puissants que leur maître humain, ces compagnons doivent être
correctement nourris et satisfaits, de peur que leur pouvoir ne submerge le chaman. L’ambivalence du sens de la
domination dans cette relation maître-compagnon implique également un processus dialectique de familiarisation,
où, en se représentant lui-même comme le compagnon ou le descendant de l’esprit à certains moments, le chaman
cherche à le maîtriser à d’autres. La familiarisation des non-humains opérant dans la sorcellerie d’assaut est
particulièrement dialectique. Une personne ne parvient à maîtriser un sort que lorsqu’elle a suffisamment nourri la
personne-maître du sort, en livrant des personnes, qu’elles soient victimes ou patients. Néanmoins, le praticien ne
peut pas abuser du sort ou agir capricieusement envers sa personne-maître, car celle-ci pourrait alors l’abandonner
ou se retourner contre lui. Plus particulièrement, la sorcellerie catégorisée comme brujería—par opposition aux
maldades considérées comme moins sophistiquées—implique le recrutement ad hoc d’esprits et d’êtres nonhumains pour effectuer différentes hostilités envers autrui. L’expression ultime du recrutement d’animaux et
d’esprits est l’auto-transformation du sorcier en un prédateur puissant pour dévorer la victime. Les victimes sur
lesquelles ces animaux sont dirigés, ou sur lesquelles le sorcier se nourrit lorsqu’il se transforme lui-même en
prédateur, doivent être vues comme la nourriture que le sorcier fournit à ses compagnons dans le cadre d’un
processus de familiarisation. Le dernier contexte d’exercice du pouvoir dans les relations avec les non-humains à
considérer dans ce chapitre est la guérison, qui vise à contrer les tentatives prédatrices de ces entités visant à
s’approprier les corps et les vies humaines. Cependant, cette pratique dépend du soutien d’autres agents nonhumains—les remèdes et leurs personnes-maîtres—ce qui implique que le guérisseur s’engage dans un échange
asymétrique avec ces agents. Étant donné que la prédation est largement liée à la source de la rivière et « en
haut », la guérison, en tant que mesure contre la prédation, est associée à l’embouchure et « en bas ». Par
conséquent, l’anaconda, associé à l’embouchure, et les arbres, qui contiennent des liquides permettant de se
défendre contre le soleil équatorial brûlant, sont spécifiquement associés à de nombreuses procédures de guérison,
notamment celles utilisées pour traiter les « maladies chaudes ». En revanche, d’autres substances associées à la
chaleur guérissent les maladies froides associées à la rivière et aux Blancs. Pour protéger la victime de la
prédation de maladies, un guérisseur doit récupérer l’aspect actif de « personne » de la victime, par opposition à
l’aspect passif de « fruit » que l’agent prédateur, ou le sorcier qui le manipule, tente de s’étendre et d’exploiter. La
guérison est perçue comme une lutte de pouvoir entre le guérisseur et le pathogène, et ce dernier peut également
se retourner contre le premier. Les capacités prédatrices de l’esprit auxiliaire tne’túi sont cruciales pour vaincre le
pathogène. Les guérisseurs se tournent vers diverses plantes et animaux pour effectuer des guérisons, avec l’idée
générale de faire ressembler le patient à certains égards à ces entités, ce qui les aiderait à guérir. Cependant, la
guérison exige également que le guérisseur contrôle l’étendue de cette ressemblance, ce qui peut être considéré
comme une autre instance de maîtrise de la direction de la familiarisation. Enfin, alors que la guérison est rendue

649

possible en recourant à diverses entités non-humaines, l’évocation du Créateur et la fourniture de substances de
familiarisation telles que la coca et le tabac visent à contrôler à la fois la direction de la familiarisation pour
empêcher l’affinisation du patient, et l’étendue de la ressemblance entre le patient et les auxiliaires non-humains.
Chapitre 10. Les dynamiques de pouvoir parmi les centres humains
Dans ce chapitre, j’aborde deux questions interreliées : quelles sont les dynamiques de pouvoir entre les personnes
appartenant à différents centres d’origines distinctes, et comment ces dynamiques influencent-elles, et sont-elles
influencées par, les relations précédemment examinées avec les non-humains ? Tout au long du chapitre, j’explore
comment les Andoque tentent de créer des asymétries en s’appropriant les corps et les agentivités d’autres clans
Andoque et non Andoque dans leur voisinage, et comment ils contrent des efforts similaires de centres rivaux. Le
chapitre commence par une discussion sur l’effet des relations antagonistes avec des êtres non-humains sur les
dynamiques entre les centres humains, car les gens doutent souvent de la capacité des autres à résister aux
influences prédatrices des non-humains. Une autre manière dont la présence des non-humains impacte les
relations entre les humains est la transformation active des autres en victimes, soit pour détourner des calamités
produites par les non-humains d’eux-mêmes, soit par la sorcellerie et d’autres pratiques où les humains sont
instrumentalisés pour établir ou maintenir une familiarisation asymétrique entre le praticien et diverses entités
non-humaines. Un bref examen de la violence passée entre les clans Andoque montre que l’objectif principal de
cette violence était de renforcer son propre clan en s’appropriant des personnes et des corps externes, qui
pouvaient ensuite être offerts à des agents externes, qu’ils soient non-autochtones ou non-humains, comme
esclaves ou sacrifices humains, en échange d’un soutien matériel ou spirituel. Bien que l’alliance matrimoniale
puisse servir à prévenir les agressions et la prédation, elle est également imprégnée de logiques prédatrices. Une
alliance matrimoniale implique une lutte prédatrice entre un beau-père et un gendre concernant la réciprocité dans
les transferts et contre-transferts de femmes, mais aussi pour déterminer lequel entre les deux parvient à imposer
son projet à l’autre et à incorporer l’autre, ou certains de ses proches, à son propre groupe, les transformant ainsi
en travailleurs—ou « orphelins ». Lors du mariage, les gens entreprennent une « familiarisation ascendante »
envers leurs beaux-parents pour prévenir d’éventuels dommages de leur part. En revanche, la relation entre beauxfrères et belles-sœurs affiche plus de symétrie. Bien que la relation idéale entre un homme et son beau-frère se
concentre sur des visites mutuelles et la collaboration dans la construction de malocas et le défrichement des
jardins, la relation collaborative entre beaux-frères maloqueros est également imprégnée de notions de rivalité et
de compétition. Les beaux-frères maloqueros sont souvent les partenaires privilégiés pour échanger des
cérémonies, une relation qui englobe à la fois collaboration et compétition, et qui renforce le prestige des
partenaires s’ils réussissent à bien la gérer. Tout comme le rôle d’un beau-frère implique à la fois assistance et
rivalité, leur clan représente, du point de vue d’un ego donné, une opportunité de reproduction sociale ainsi qu’un
risque de déviation par rapport aux principes et traditions de son propre clan. Cette tension est typique des «

650

sociétés à maisons », où la parenté cognatique coexiste avec la descendance patrilinéaire, et est souvent
représentée par la femme qui entre par mariage, incarnant l’agentivité périlleuse de son patriclan d’origine.
J’examine la méfiance des membres du clan envers les femmes mariées au sein de leur clan et leur attente que ces
dernières prêtent allégeance à leur nouveau clan, une inclination à la fois inscrite dans la mythologie et
manifestant dans l’implication des femmes dans les structures politiques contemporaines, comme la réserve. Alors
que des tentatives de consanguinisation sont faites lors du mariage, ma discussion montre comment l’inceste, ainsi
que la sorcellerie, fonctionnent dans la direction opposée, visant à dissocier la consanguinité et à traiter les
membres de son propre centre humain, ou d’un centre allié par affinité, comme des non-parents, en engageant un
échange prédateur avec eux. En discutant du tabou de l’inceste chez les Andoque et de la préférence pour se
marier juste au-delà du cercle des relations incestueuses, je retrouve une « touche dravidienne », comme celle que
l’on trouve parmi d’autres Peuples du Centre, avec la préférence des parents pour marier leur enfant avec les
enfants de leurs cousins classificatoires. Dans le passé, un neveu classificatoire d’un maloquero né d’une union
avec l’une des parentes féminines du dernier et appartenant ainsi à un autre patriclan, pouvait devenir un orphelin
s’il vivait dans la maison de ce maloquero pour diverses raisons, au lieu de résider dans la maloca de son propre
patriclan. Dans cette situation, étant un non-membre du clan du maloquero, il pouvait potentiellement être vendu
comme esclave. La divergence des Andoque par rapport au dravidianat amazonien typique nécessite un examen
du rôle protecteur du grand-père, qui peut adopter un aspect agressif envers le conjoint de son petit-enfant en cas
d’inceste. Étant donné la perception des liens sexuels et matrimoniaux comme la capture de la femme par le clan
de l’homme, ces unions incestueuses mettent en évidence la tension inhérente entre l’affiliation cognatique et
l’identité agnatique, pouvant potentiellement amener les grands-parents, qui sont idéalement des figures
protectrices pour tous leurs petits-enfants, à adopter des attitudes agressives envers les parents non agnatiques.
Alors que l’inceste implique de bafouer les règles de la consanguinité, la sorcellerie implique souvent des affins
réels résistant à la familiarisation impliquée dans la réalisation de l’échange matrimonial, et préservant, voire
exagérant, la posture inamicale du yóʼo, ou ennemi, ou la voracité sexuelle débridée du saámḭ, ou affin potentiel.
Les vrais affins sont perçus comme des menaces et accusés de sorcellerie comme moyen d’exprimer la tension
entre l’appartenance cognatique et agnatique. Puisque les victimes de sorcellerie sont conçues comme la
nourriture que le sorcier fournit aux personnes-maîtres des sorts, ces derniers devenant ainsi ses compagnons, il
est donc important de noter que la dissociation de la parenté humaine à travers la sorcellerie est utilisée pour
établir ou maintenir des relations de familiarisation (ou de méta-parenté) avec des entités non-humaines. La
coexistence de principes cognatiques et agnatiques dans la définition des frontières des centres humains est liée à
une tension dans les attitudes des Andoque envers l’échange matrimonial, entre leur aspiration à des échanges
mutuels qui favorisent les liens cérémoniels et découragent les conflits entre les parties impliquées, et leur
idéologie agnatique, qui, dans certains contextes, favorise le bénéfice du clan au détriment de l’échange
symétrique avec les autres. Dans le contexte d’un modèle de résidence virilocale, l’idéologie agnatique est

651

également apparente dans la préférence pour les fils plutôt que les filles. La préférence pour les descendants
masculins a pris un nouvel élan à la suite du génocide du caoutchouc, lorsque le petit groupe de survivants a
cherché à augmenter sa démographie. Ainsi, la réhabilitation de la capacité prédatrice, jugée cruciale pour le
processus de récupération culturelle et démographique post-génocide des Andoque, visait également à se
matérialiser dans un échange matrimonial asymétrique avec des groupes non andoque. Cependant, mon analyse de
la dynamique matrimoniale du post-génocide montre que le déséquilibre entre les sexes ne s’est pas traduit par un
échange global asymétrique de femmes, où les Andoque reçoivent significativement plus de femmes des autres
groupes qu’ils n’en donnent, mais a plutôt résulté en un équilibre entre les femmes entrantes et sortantes. Alors
que l’échange asymétrique de femmes était considéré comme essentiel pour augmenter la population andoque, des
stratégies d’échange matrimonial plus équilibrées ont été établies entre les maloqueros et les capitaines non
andoque avec lesquels ils visaient à former des alliances ou à prévenir les hostilités. La capacité à mobiliser des
enfants pour le mariage, en particulier des filles, était un élément crucial du pouvoir d’un maloquero, car cela
renforçait à la fois sa capacité à naviguer dans les échanges délicats avec d’autres centres humains, et son prestige
et sa main-d’œuvre, grâce au service de la mariée. Ainsi, alors que les orphelins, en tant que membres non
consanguins de la maloca, étaient échangés contre des biens non-autochtones dans un commerce hétérosubstitutif,
les proches parents du maloquero, en particulier ses enfants, étaient échangés dans de tels échanges
homosubstitutifs entre clans. Lorsqu’on discute d’une période où les arrangements matrimoniaux par les parents
sont moins fréquents et systématiques et où les jeunes individus ont une plus grande liberté de chercher euxmêmes des conjoints sans prioriser les intérêts de leur clan, il est important d’examiner non seulement les
dynamiques de pouvoir que les stratégies matrimoniales visent à atteindre, mais aussi celles que les unions
matrimoniales produisent. Je discute des deux phénomènes les plus remarquables qui ont émergé en raison des
processus matrimoniaux parmi les Andoque : la marginalisation du Clan Aigle, et en particulier de la lignée de
l’Aigle Harpie, par opposition aux alliances plus étroites entre les Clans Soleil, Fourmi Atta et Scarabée qui se
marient entre eux, et l’alliance concurrentielle entre la lignée de l’Aigle Harpie et le Clan Soleil. La dernière
section de ce chapitre examine la politique de connaissance des Andoque. La connaissance est une ressource
cruciale, rare et très contestée pour façonner les échanges avec les centres humains et non-humains concurrents, et
elle est soumise à une politique complexe de dissimulation et de divulgation parmi les individus et les groupes.
Dans cette politique de connaissance, il est courant de garder pour soi les connaissances et compétences
chamaniques que l’on possède, de peur que les concurrents ne cherchent à démontrer une relation plus étroite avec
les personnes-maîtres de ses compétences et à les dépouiller de celles-ci. De plus, on garde pour soi sa propre
connaissance si les autres possèdent de telles capacités, de crainte d’être accusé de tout malheur leur arrivant.
Divulguer la connaissance compromet sa possession. J’explique la notion de secret des Andoque en élargissant le
modèle de Simmel du secret pour englober également des acteurs non-humains, proposant à considérer le secret
d’un individu lié à une compétence chamanique comme une relation sociale entretenue par l’individu avec la

652

personne-maître de cette compétence et excluant d’autres acteurs humains. La valeur du secret est inversement
proportionnelle au nombre d’individus au courant. Cette valeur accorde au gardien du secret le pouvoir d’imposer
une asymétrie aux autres par la sorcellerie ou de contrer de telles tentatives par la guérison. En tenant compte des
secrets antérieurs avec d’autres éléments non-humains et de l’initiation par d’autres êtres humains nécessaires
pour acquérir la maîtrise sur les personnes-maîtres, situe la connaissance pratique dans un cadre récursif où, à
chaque niveau, les agents humains et non-humains s’efforcent d’imposer des asymétries les unes aux autres ou de
les contrer. En tenant compte de la distinction que les Andoque font entre la divulgation indiscrète de la
connaissance et sa transmission au sein du clan ou lors d’un processus d’initiation, je montre que tandis que la
divulgation indiscrète d’une compétence résulte de l’expansion capricieuse et non autorisée du groupe secret de la
personne-maître et du praticien pour inclure un troisième partageur du secret, un processus d’initiation peut être
interprété comme représentant ou effectuant l’expansion du corps du tuteur pour inclure ce troisième partageur.
La connaissance est, par définition, le projet d’un centre clanique donné. Elle est créée, préservée et partagée entre
les parents consanguins dans le but d’assurer la survie de ce centre par le biais de la survie et du bien-être de ces
parents. Cela met en lumière les exigences en matière de régime alimentaire pendant les processus d’initiation,
pour créer une consubstantialité entre le tuteur et l’apprenti et les protéger des influences affines. Le chapitre se
termine en discutant des offrandes dans les bals cérémoniels, ou ḭtasé, également appelées en espagnol secretos,
comme paradigmatiques pour la notion de secret andoque, en tant qu’interaction puissante avec des entités nonhumaines pour assurer le bien-être du groupe humain, cachée aux parents affins.
Chapitre 11. Échanges et subordination dans les bals cérémoniels
Dans ce chapitre, j’examine la façon dont la réciprocité et l’asymétrie sont gérées lors des moments pivots des
bals cérémoniels où convergent les relations explorées dans les chapitres précédents entre les centres humains et
leurs interactions avec les entités non-humaines. Les bals cérémoniels sont perçus comme essentiels pour
améliorer la reproduction, mais un bal mal organisé peut avoir l’effet inverse, entraînant des épidémies et d’autres
cas d’augmentation de la prédation des humains par les entités non-humaines de leur territoire. Pour atteindre
l’objectif général du bal, qui est de protéger le groupe humain en familiarisant les affins potentiels non-humains
nuisibles, les organisateurs du bal et les travailleurs doivent s’assurer que leurs relations ne sont pas influencées
par des tendances de prédation affinisantes, telles que l’agressivité ou la sexualité. Le chapitre explore
l’interaction des dynamiques qui sont au cœur de la réussite d’un bal : la hiérarchie au sein d’un centre humain
donné—c’est-à-dire l’autorité non coercitive d’un capitaine sur son groupe ; la rivalité entre les centres
humains—à savoir entre le capitaine hôte et le capitaine invité, et leurs groupes respectifs ; et l’hostilité entre les
groupes humains et les personnes-maîtres non-humains des sites et des espèces du territoire. Dans la première
section, je présente un modèle général qui explique comment les bals cérémoniels servent à dramatiser et à
atténuer les tensions entre les capitaines et leurs travailleurs, ainsi que les conflits entre les groupes affins, dans le

653

but de traiter et d’alléger les antagonismes avec les entités non-humaines du territoire. Les tensions entre les
capitaines et les travailleurs sont dramatisées à travers les chants de critique que ces derniers adressent aux
premiers. En partageant des substances rituelles avec le chanteur, le capitaine rejette les associations avec les
forces prédatrices et adopte une attitude consanguinisante envers son personnel. Les relations entre les groupes
affins dans les bals cérémoniels prennent la forme de collaboration et de concurrence entre les maloqueros hôtes
et invités, ce qui est essentiel pour renforcer la capacité des maloqueros à gérer leurs interactions avec les nonhumains. Du point de vue de l’hôte, l’invité—ou ḭtáu’fa, « celui qui reçoit du tabac »—est situé à mi-chemin entre
les parents consanguins de l’hôte et les entités non-humaines, sur un spectre d’altérité. Bien que le groupe invité
devienne dépendant des pensées et du comportement des organisateurs de la danse par les substances qu’ils lui
fournissent avant la danse, lors de l’échange de viande et de substances rituelles pendant la cérémonie, l’invité en
vient à représenter le monde non-humain. Les substances rituelles fournies au groupe invité pendant le bal
représentent l’apprivoisement des produits fauniques externes dangereux apportés par les membres de ce groupe,
éliminent leur colère et assurent leur consubstantialité avec les organisateurs. Les défis posés par les chanteurs du
groupe invité dans leurs chants de critique pendant le bal offrent à l’hôte l’opportunité d’augmenter son contrôle
sur le monde non-humain en fournissant à ces chanteurs des substances rituelles en réponse à leurs critiques,
rejetant les maux que certaines entités non-humaines peuvent infliger au groupe et permettant à l’hôte de mieux
s’approprier les capacités d’autres. En revenant aux chants de critique des non-invités, nous observons que
l’échange horizontal de denrées alimentaires et de paroles pour des substances cérémonielles avec le partenaire
cérémonial affin—qui est nécessaire pour transformer la relation dangereusement symétrique avec les affins
potentiels non-humains en un échange asymétrique d’agentivités et de corps (animaux) bénéfique pour le groupe
humain—présuppose l’existence d’un échange vertical d’agentivités et de substances entre le maloquero et son
personnel. Le fait que le prestige du capitaine et sa capacité connexe à mobiliser les gens pour travailler ou à
établir et maintenir des alliances cérémonielles avec d’autres dépendent de son succès démontré dans la
négociation avec les entités non-humaines, notamment à travers les bals cérémoniels, me conduit à proposer un
modèle relationnel pour comprendre les bals andoque avec trois classes de relations (capitaine/peuple ordinaire ;
deux maloqueros ; humain-non-humain). Chaque type de relation comporte des tensions, dont la manifestation et
l’atténuation sont cruciales pour gérer les tensions inhérentes aux autres types de relations de manière
avantageuse. Dans la deuxième section, j’explore plus en profondeur les relations de pouvoir asymétriques que les
Andoque s’efforcent d’établir avec les êtres non-humains en me concentrant sur les bals tutélaires prestigieux et
chargés de pouvoir—par opposition aux bals ordinaires inférieurs—et sur les perspectives des membres Andoque
quant à l’importance et la dangerosité de ces bals, ainsi que leur centralité ou marginalité respective dans la
pratique rituelle contemporaine. Les Andoque catégorisent leurs bals tutélaires en deux spécialisations rituelles : «
Rouge » (Peɒɵsí) et « Blanche » (Pó’fiɵ). Suite à une description des bals classifiés dans ces deux spécialisations,
j’examine l’estime élevée dans laquelle presque tous tiennent la spécialisation rouge et l’ambivalence, le mépris et

654

la méfiance répandus envers la spécialisation blanche. Cela se traduit par un déclin de la fréquence des bals blancs
par rapport aux bals rouges, un nombre réduit de maloqueros adhérant à la spécialisation blanche, et une
diminution du nombre de cérémonies de nomination appartenant à cette spécialisation, en comparaison avec celles
suivant la rouge. Pour comprendre la montée de la spécialisation rouge et le déclin de la blanche, il faut
approfondir les différentes manières d’interagir avec les entités humaines et non-humaines que chaque bal reflète.
Pour ce faire, il est nécessaire de dévoiler la correspondance sous-jacente entre les deux spécialisations
cérémonielles et l’ordre de naissance entre frères. Cela, à son tour, exige une analyse comparative avec des
systèmes similaires de prérogatives rituelles et d’ordre de naissance chez d’autres Peuples du Centre. Je propose
l’hypothèse suivante : dans le passé, les Andoque maintenaient un système quadripolaire similaire à celui observé
parmi les peuples voisins, caractérisé par une corrélation idéale entre les prérogatives rituelles et l’ordre de
naissance des quatre fils d’un maloquero. Cependant, je suggère que ces quatre spécialisations ont
progressivement gravité vers une division duale, se consolidant en deux chemins cérémoniels : la spécialisation
rouge, consistant en des cérémonies centrées sur la continuité patrilinéaire et dirigées par le fils aîné, et la
spécialisation blanche, englobant les spécialisations des trois autres frères et se concentrant principalement sur la
gestion des relations avec les parents affins réels et potentiels. La division Andoque entre les spécialisations rouge
et blanche reflète certaines dimensions de la dualité entre le chamanisme vertical et horizontal observée parmi
d’autres peuples de l’Amazonie nord-ouest, le premier étant associé à la primogéniture et à la transmission
ésotérique de connaissances gardées par le clan, et le second au monde affinal et à l’apprentissage plus ouvert de
la communication avec celui-ci. L’aversion exprimée par les Andoque envers la spécialisation blanche ressemble
à leur répugnance envers les sorciers et les guérisseurs, qui sont moralement ambigus et entretiennent une relation
étroite avec les entités non-humaines. Comme ces spécialistes, les maloqueros blancs sont soupçonnés de ne pas
pouvoir contrôler l’échange dangereux avec les non-humains, ce qui pourrait mener à leur familiarisation par ces
entités plutôt qu’à la familiarisation de ces dernières. En revanche, la posture plus agressive de la spécialisation
rouge s’accorde avec une plus grande emphase sur la descendance patrilinéaire et l’identité, une tendance plus
marquée à l’asymétrie dans l’échange avec les entités non-humaines, et une dégradation de leur agentivité qui
rend moins probable le potentiel d’inversion inhérent à la logique de la prédation de familiarisation. Comment
expliquer la montée de la spécialisation rouge et le déclin de la blanche ? Au-delà de la prééminence inégalée de
Yiñékɒ, qui appartenait à la spécialisation rouge, dans l’histoire récente des Andoque, je propose que trois
facteurs sous-jacents ont également contribué à ce processus: l’objectif des Andoque de reproduire et de retrouver
leur agentivité après le génocide du caoutchouc, pour lequel les bals rouges, avec leurs connotations prédatrices et
leur accent sur la descendance agnatique au détriment de l’échange symétrique avec les êtres humains et nonhumains, étaient instrumental ; les mesures spécifiques prises par Yiñékɒ pour faciliter la future consolidation de
centres claniques distincts, nécessitant une emphase sur la primogéniture et ses bals associés ; et la perception
croissante des êtres humains comme supérieurs aux non-humains et l’inclination à s’engager dans un échange

655

asymétrique avec eux. Ce processus signale l’interconnexion entre l’idéologie agnatique dans le domaine des
relations interhumaines et la supériorité humaine dans le domaine des relations humains-non-humains, réitérant la
continuité entre les échanges asymétriques dans les relations interhumaines et dans les relations humains-nonhumains, comme exploré tout au long de cette partie de la thèse.

Quatrième Partie : Les relations de pouvoir avec l’embouchure
Dans cette partie de la thèse, je termine l’analyse des dynamiques de pouvoir au sein de la société Andoque en
abordant les aspects clés de la présence et de l’impact des non-autochtones, en répondant à la question : Comment
les Andoque perçoivent-ils et influencent-ils les dynamiques de pouvoir dans leur interaction avec les Blancs, et
comment ces interactions affectent-elles les relations de pouvoir des Andoque avec les entités non-humaines ? À
l’instar d’autres Amazoniens autochtones, les Andoque ne s’opposent pas à l’économie de marché ou à la logique
capitaliste en tant que telle, mais sont principalement préoccupés par leur position désavantageuse persistante
dans les échanges asymétriques avec les non-autochtones, cherchant à équilibrer cette asymétrie et même à utiliser
les ressources obtenues des agents non-autochtones pour leurs propres projets et leur reproduction sociale. Les
chapitres suivants, largement catégorisés en thèmes de consommation, extraction et production, et préservation,
démontrent comment les Andoque contemplent ces asymétries à travers les prismes du schéma relationnel
prédateur, de leurs notions de parenté et de familiarisation, et de la manipulation ontologique de la valeur.
Chapitre 12. La prédation par et la familiarisation de l’embouchure
Dans ce chapitre, je discute des différentes images des Blancs en tant qu’ennemis et affins dans le mythe, le rituel
et d’autres contextes discursifs chez les Andoque, et j’explore les dangers de la prédation et de la séduction par
l’embouchure du fleuve ainsi que les divers mécanismes par lesquels les Andoque tentent de faire face à ces
dangers et d’imposer un échange réciproque aux Blancs. Ces dangers et les mécanismes pour les contrer
s’expriment et opèrent à travers les catégories de l’espace, de la parenté et de l’humanité examinées tout au long
de cette thèse : les positions de la source du fleuve, du centre et de l’embouchure ; l’échange affinal et la
familiarisation des non-parents ; et les êtres humains contre les êtres non-humains. Les notions d’espace se
manifestent dans les récits mythiques des Andoque qui placent les Blancs vers l’embouchure pour ainsi préserver
la position de prédateur pour eux-mêmes, contrairement à la situation inverse, avec les Blancs placés vers la
source du fleuve et les Andoque relégués à la position de proie. L’échange de biens est possible, souhaité ou
bénéfique dans la mesure où l’on se trouve dans la position de prédateur, mais impossible, indésirable ou
préjudiciable dans la mesure où l’on se trouve dans une position de proie. Une ambition centrale des Andoque est
donc de s’assurer que les agents non-autochtones qu’ils rencontrent agissent comme des « commerçants » de

656

l’embouchure et non comme des « brûleurs » de la source du fleuve, ou, autrement dit, d’occuper une position en
amont par rapport à eux. Dans le contexte rituel, invoquer les agressions et les dommages causés par les Blancs
lors des bals cérémoniels, ainsi que d’autres formes de prédation directe et indirecte par ceux-ci, sert
d’opportunité pour les organisateurs du bal de conjurer ces dangers. Ils y parviennent en offrant des substances
rituelles aux participants visibles du bal, et à travers eux, aux forces invisibles associées à l’embouchure. En
examinant le rituel de distribution de caguana qui précède les grandes bals andoque à la lumière des épidémies
passées représentant une prédation massive par les pouvoirs affins associés à l’embouchure, je formule
l’hypothèse que cette cérémonie vise à protéger les organisateurs et les travailleurs du bal en créant une forte
identification agnatique avant les échanges exogamiques avec les affins réels et potentiels, humains et nonhumains, qui ont lieu pendant le bal principal, comme un rempart contre une prédation affinale éventuelle.
L’échange avec les Blancs n’est pas une garantie automatique contre leurs agressions et leur prédation, car, dans
le passé, de nombreux articles reçus lors de tels échanges ont transmis des épidémies. Diverses stratégies rituelles
et narratives, y compris le mythe sur l’origine du commerce avec les Blancs, visent à garantir que les biens reçus
servent de bɨ’iá, ou « outils de travail », et, par extension, d’éléments servant à la reproduction du groupe
récepteur, plutôt que de yoóka, ou « choses déviantes » qui entraînent des maladies, de l’envie, des conflits et des
accidents. Étant donné l’emploi de substances rituelles dérivées de la coca, du tabac et du manioc pour contrer les
impacts adverses de l’embouchure, je suggère que l’association généralisée des Andoque entre les cultures ainsi
que la maloca et cette direction, comme discuté dans la partie II, peut faire partie d’une représentation stratégique
de la source du fleuve comme un arsenal contre l’embouchure, aidant le centre à la surmonter. Un récit sur la
prédation passée des clans andoque par des marchands dauphins venus d’aval nous conduit à explorer l’image de
cet animal, qui encode pour les Andoque le danger de l’échange désavantageux avec des agents non-autochtones,
où ces derniers remboursent les transferts de biens ou de personnes des peuples autochtones sans compensation ou
avec des « choses déviantes » qui entraînent des malheurs et la mort. L’histoire de l’origine des dauphins retrace
leur dangerosité à une transaction trompeuse qui est conçue, dans l’idiome de la parenté, comme un inceste. Des
bals confrontent les dangers de l’embouchure, y compris la violence manifeste, les épidémies et les biens
nuisibles, en familiarisant et en apaisant la colère des entités de cette direction à travers des offrandes rituelles, et
en imposant la réciprocité à ces êtres incestueux. Le danger de la consubstantialité avec les dauphins nous conduit
à examiner la notion andoque de « Devenir Blanc ». Bien que les déclarations des interlocuteurs andoque
indiquent que le processus de devenir Blanc peut potentiellement compromettre le statut pleinement humain d’une
personne, d’autres déclarations reflètent la position des individus andoque actuels au milieu d’un spectre allant de
« l’indianité » à la « blancheur ». Je suggère que les dauphins sont attirés par les Andoque et les agressent non
seulement parce qu’ils souhaitent les intégrer dans leur société, mais aussi parce qu’ils discernent déjà quelque
chose de « Blanc », et donc de dauphin, chez les Andoque. Comme cette dissertation vise à démêler la
construction et le fonctionnement des dynamiques de pouvoir au croisement des relations humains-non-humains

657

et des interactions autochtones-non-autochtones, il est impératif d’approfondir la nature précise de l’association
entre les dauphins et les acteurs non-autochtones. Une grande partie de la littérature anthropologique concernant
cette association amazonienne, y compris les travaux précédemment cités, adhère à un cadre représentatif, où les
dauphins sont considérés comme des représentations symboliques des Blancs, et les risques potentiels associés à
l’engagement avec les dauphins sont considérés comme des métaphores illustrant les périls posés par les agents
non-autochtones ou le processus d’assimilation dans leur société. En revanche, mes données révèlent que, dans le
cas andoque, la connexion entre le dauphin et les Blancs n’est pas verticale, c’est-à-dire métaphorique, mais
horizontale, évoquant une continuité entre le domaine des interactions humains-non-humains et celui des relations
interhumaines. Plutôt qu’une simple métaphore du domaine non-humain pour un objet externe—c’est-à-dire
l’assimilation dans la société non-autochtone—l’interaction avec les dauphins sert de transducteur, convertissant
l’ontologie des relations interhumaines en celle des relations humains-non-humains, et vice versa. Par conséquent,
nous devrions considérer devenir Blanc et l’incorporation dans la société et l’économie non-autochtones comme
une voie par laquelle les individus risquent de devenir la proie des non-humains et de perdre le corps humain qui
les distingue du monde des affins non-humains potentiels. Malgré l’existence de diverses stratégies pour gérer et
contrôler l’échange avec les Blancs afin de contrer la prédation par les agents associés à l’embouchure, il serait
erroné de déduire que les Andoque sont satisfaits de cet échange. Au contraire, mes interlocuteurs pointent
fréquemment de nombreux accidents, conflits violents et désordres internes comme des indicateurs que cet
échange n’est pas efficacement géré. Le chapitre se termine par un bref examen de l’insatisfaction des Andoque
quant à leur gestion de l’argent, souvent dépensé en alcool lorsqu’il est gagné en grandes quantités. L’argent est
absent de la mythologie andoque. En examinant cette question dans le cadre de la familiarisation à travers le
mythe et le rituel, il devient évident que l’argent existe en dehors du système où le capitaine et les anciens
transforment les « choses déviantes » en « outils de travail ». Nous pouvons conceptualiser l’argent comme
l’équivalent économique des entités fi’du, qui sont plus dangereuses que d’autres entités non-humaines
précisément parce qu’elles résistent à la symbolisation. L’absence d’argent dans la mythologie reflète un surplus
du « Réel », selon les termes de Lacan, qui est souvent converti en alcool dans les transactions économiques
contemporaines.
Chapitre 13. Le commerces des personnes du territoire
Comment la participation des Andoque à différentes activités extractives affecte-t-elle leurs relations avec les
entités non-humaines impliquées ? Dans ce chapitre, je me concentre sur les processus de familiarisation et
d’affinisation avec les personnes non-humaines qui se sont déroulés lors des différentes périodes extractives et ont
été affectés par diverses activités économiques. Dans la première section, j’explore les activités qui ont provoqué
des représailles prédatrices de la part des personnes-maîtres des ressources extraites, situant cette prédation dans
un cadre triangulaire d’actions prédatrices impliquant les Andoque, les acteurs non-autochtones et les entités non-

658

humaines. Je commence par considérer la perception des Andoque du génocide du caoutchouc comme résultant
de la vengeance des personnes-maîtres de leur territoire à cause de l’exploitation excessive des arbres à
caoutchouc, et les stratégies narratives et rituelles par lesquelles Yiñékɒ a cherché à éviter une vengeance
similaire après la récupération convertissant le caoutchouc spirituellement en cultures domestiques, dont
l’extraction ne déclencherait pas de représailles par leurs personnes-maîtres. En revanche, les membres andoque
décrivent la chasse et la pêche commerciales comme plus dangereuses, tout en y participant toujours en raison de
leurs besoins économiques. À cet égard, la prédation par les Blancs, reflétée, entre autres, dans l’échange
asymétrique que les Andoque entretiennent avec eux, conduit à la prédation excessive des Andoque sur les êtres
non-humains sous forme de chasse, de pêche et d’exploitation d’autres ressources, ce qui conduit à son tour à la
prédation des membres andoque par des non-humains comme représailles. Néanmoins, je discute des moyens
rituels pour atténuer ces représailles potentielles, spécifiquement pour la pêche. Les Andoque ont des opinions
contrastées concernant la possibilité de se réconcilier avec les esprits gardiens du territoire dans le contexte d’une
activité extractive relativement récente à laquelle beaucoup d’entre eux ont participé, à savoir l’exploitation
aurifère. Ma discussion de l’engagement des Andoque dans cette activité met en évidence les perspectives
diverses qui peuvent émerger concernant le risque de prédation par des entités non-humaines en raison d’activités
extractives spécifiques, et la capacité que différents individus détiennent, ou considèrent possible, de puiser dans
la mythologie et les expériences passées comme des stratégies pour atténuer ces risques. Dans la deuxième
section, j’aborde les activités économiques qui menace la maîtrise des Andoque sur les entités échangées, souvent
avec des conséquences plus larges pour la gestion des relations de pouvoir avec d’autres êtres non-humains ainsi
qu’avec les peuples autochtones et non-autochtones. J’examine la participation des Andoque aux enquêtes
scientifiques en discutant des récits de mes interlocuteurs sur les « Décapiteurs ». Ces récits et d’autres rumeurs
reflètent l’idée que le savoir est physiquement stocké et peut être usurpé aux autochtones par des étrangers ayant
un appétit vorace pour ce savoir. Enseigner des choses aux étrangers est perçu comme un transfert total de ce
savoir de la partie autochtone à la partie non-autochtone. Le savoir est essentiellement pratique et donc inutile
lorsqu’il est uniquement publié dans des livres et non mis en pratique dans des contextes spécifiques. Ainsi, le
savoir cédé aux étrangers est effectivement extrait et absent du territoire andoque. En passant au commerce de la
poudre de coca, une activité qui se déroulait pendant mon travail de terrain, j’analyse les rapports de mes
interlocuteurs sur les risques posés par ce commerce, auquel beaucoup d’entre eux néanmoins s’engagent
activement. Le commerce de la poudre de coca présente le risque de rendre l’aide recherchée auprès de cette
plante nettement moins certaine, en raison de sa familiarisation inachevée. Les pensées et actions des
consommateurs urbains de la coca peuvent représenter des principes s’opposant à ceux posés par les traditions du
producteur, entraînant la perte de contrôle du producteur sur la plante de coca, et, par conséquent, sur les autres
entités non-humaines qu’il essaierait de familiariser par sa consommation. En examinant la solution idéalisée à ce
problème proposée (bien que pas nécessairement suivie) par divers interlocuteurs—à savoir, la séparation des

659

plantes pour un usage commercial et personnel/cérémoniel—et en m’appuyant sur la distinction don/marchandise,
je suggère que cette solution vise à promouvoir davantage le statut marchand des plantes destinées à la vente en
augmentant leur aliénabilité par rapport au producteur. En atteignant ainsi son aliénation idéalisée, la
consommation de cette coca par les consommateurs urbains ne contamine pas et ne familiarise potentiellement
pas le reste de la coca du producteur, qui reste inaliénable. Cette préservation de l’inaliénabilité pour certaines des
plantes permet au producteur de familiariser et de maîtriser l’esprit de la plante et d’autres entités non-humaines.
Revenant de la distinction don/marchandise aux concepts andoque, je suggère que, alors que le producteur a
l’intention de garder certaines plantes de coca comme ses « compagnons »—qui peuvent refuser leur soutien à
leur maître ou se venger s’ils sont négligés—il traite d’autres comme ses « orphelins », qui ont moins d’agentivité
et peuvent être échangés relativement en toute sécurité par leur capitaine. L’orphelinat émerge donc comme
l’équivalent conceptuel autochtone de la marchandisation. Dans certains cas, afin de familiariser ses
consommateurs urbains, les Andoque peuvent vouloir partager de la coca en tant que don—un objet inaliénable
qui nécessite un certain degré de personnalisation pour l’échange. Néanmoins, le commerce de la coca tend à être
impersonnel. Ces considérations fournissent un aperçu des dynamiques de pouvoir entre les Andoque et les agents
non-autochtones et non-humains. D’une part, en traitant la coca comme un compagnon et en partageant la poudre
comme un don, les producteurs andoque peuvent dominer les consommateurs urbains en les familiarisant, mais
prennent le risque que les pensées et actions de ces consommateurs urbains lors de la consommation affinisent le
produit, compromettant la capacité du producteur à dominer l’esprit de la coca et d’autres entités non-humaines.
D’autre part, la marchandisation de la poudre et sa transaction comme un orphelin protège le producteur de cette
affinisation mais exclut la domination du consommateur. Cependant, le décalage entre le discours et la pratique
des gens, évident dans leur manque de personnalisation du commerce de la coca et dans leur échec à mettre en
œuvre la solution idéalisée de la séparation des jardins, démontre qu’ils n’épuisent ni le potentiel don ni le
potentiel marchandise des transactions impliquant une plante qui est au centre de leur identité et de leurs relations
tant avec les non-autochtones qu’avec les non-humains. Par conséquent, les difficultés des Andoque à adhérer aux
stratégies proposées pour atténuer les risques associés et à saisir les opportunités de façonner les attitudes des
consommateurs soulignent une indécision générale quant à la manière de naviguer dans les relations de pouvoir
avec les entités non-humaines et non-autochtones impliquées.
Chapitre 14. L’écologisme et l’englobement de mondes
Dans ce chapitre, j’aborde deux questions interreliées : comment les Andoque perçoivent-ils l’impact des agences
écologistes sur leurs relations de pouvoir avec les entités non-humaines ainsi qu’avec les autres agents nonautochtones, et comment cherchent-ils à utiliser des initiatives axées sur la préservation pour sécuriser leur
position au sein de ces relations plus larges ? Contrairement aux études qui mettent l’accent sur le fossé
ontologique entre les peuples autochtones et les Occidentaux modernes dans le contexte de la politique

660

environnementale, ce chapitre se concentre sur la double approche des Andoque envers les non-humains dans le
cadre d’initiatives environnementales et de politiques publiques, les considérant à la fois comme des entités
subordonnées pouvant être utilisées et comme des agents indépendants largement hostiles. Je suggère que
l’objectif principal des Andoque dans leurs interactions avec les environnementalistes et l’État est d’affirmer leurs
échanges asymétriques avec les non-humains, en dévalorisant souvent l’agentivité des non-humains, pour atténuer
les échanges déséquilibrés avec les peuples non-autochtones. Les Andoque contestent souvent les attentes des
environnementalistes selon lesquelles ils adhéreraient à l’image du « Bon Sauvage Écologique », et leur quête de
souveraineté sur les ressources a été mise en évidence par leur appel à la tutelle de L’État contre un programme
REDD+ à niveau national et par leur campagne pour légaliser l’exploitation aurifère dans leur territoire, deux
processus explorés dans la première section. Pourtant, comme l’agentivité des non-humains ne peut être éteinte,
ils restent des adversaires potentiels. Les Andoque critiquent les politiques environnementales favorisant la
protection de la flore et de la faune hostiles tout en ignorant la situation des peuples autochtones, aggravée par les
non-autochtones en tant qu’acteurs du marché. Les entités environnementales assumant le rôle des personnesmaîtres des non-humains sont censées indemniser les Andoque pour la restriction d’accès à ces ressources,
qu’elles ont illégitimement usurpées. De plus, la notion du Monde Animal englobé par le ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí des Andoque,
explorée au chapitre 8, considère les tentatives extérieures de gestion des non-humains comme une atteinte aux
principes de leur monde et de leurs origines, rendant les interactions avec les environnementalistes plus
conflictuelles. Cette préoccupation a également des implications pour les connaissances utilisées dans les projets
environnementaux, car les connaissances strictement orientées vers la reproduction des non-humains, plutôt que
celle des humains, sont perçues comme mettant en danger les Andoque dans les relations de pouvoir de leur
territoire. De plus, les initiatives environnementales sont utilisées pour réparer ou redéfinir les relations avec les
non-humains, affaiblies par l’engagement économique avec les Blancs, assurant ainsi la préservation de la
capacité autochtone à dicter des échanges asymétriques avec les non-humains, une condition clé pour le bien-être
et la reproduction humaine. Enfin, compte tenu de l’étendue des engagements des Andoque avec les
environnementalistes, je considère ces interactions comme une arène privilégiée dans le déploiement du complexe
triangle relationnel entre les Andoque, les non-autochtones et les entités non-humaines. Par conséquent, en ligne
avec la définition de cette dissertation du territoire/monde comme connectivité et la notion andoque de mondes
englobants, je suggère que les négociations des Andoque avec les environnementalistes reflètent un désir
d’inverser l’englobement de leur ñó̰ḭ́ fɵsí par le monde des Blancs sous le modèle actuel de l’économie extractive.
Contrairement à la logique extractive, où le monde des Blancs s’approprie les ressources du monde andoque,
sapant son réseau relationnel et la position des Andoque en son sein, sous le modèle préféré, les ressources
extraites du monde des Blancs sont intégrées dans le réseau de relations constituant le territoire andoque,
améliorant potentiellement la vie des Andoque et leur permettant de définir les interactions avec les non-humains.
En s’appuyant sur la comparaison fréquente des Andoque entre l’argent et le sel végétal, nous pouvons interpréter

661

cette approche comme la conversion de l’argent en sel : transformant les moyens de communication, d’échange, et
de pouvoir et de domination dans le monde des Blancs en un moyen de communication, d’échange, de
familiarisation et de contre-prédation dans le territoire ancestral andoque. La conversion métaphorique de l’argent
en sel sert d’exemple pour montrer comment le pouvoir peut être traduit d’une ontologie—ou d’un monde où
cette ontologie, compris en tant que connectivité, est stabilisée—à une autre. Ce concept pose les bases d’une
approche ontologique politique qui, contrairement à la focalisation prédominante sur la compétition entre des
ontologies radicalement incomparables cherchant à se marginaliser, se remplacer ou s’annihiler, explore des
processus plus subtils de continuité entre les actions politiques et les dynamiques de pouvoir se déroulant dans des
régimes de connectivité différents, mais partiellement chevauchants. Dans le cas présent, le chevauchement
concerne la perception andoque de l’asymétrie humain-non-humain et les stratégies qu’ils emploient pour
minimiser l’agentivité des non-humains. L’animisme hiérarchique et les manipulations ontologiques des Andoque
sous-tendent leur revendication de souveraineté sur les ressources. Sans réduire les composantes non-humaines de
leur territoire à de simples objets, ils indiquent dans les interactions avec les environnementalistes leur
reconnaissance de la possession d’actifs précieux dans le monde des Blancs, et insistent pour que ces derniers
reconnaissent cette valeur de manière similaire. Sur la base de cette reconnaissance, les Andoque souhaitent
recevoir des fonds pour des projets, qu’ils utiliseraient ensuite pour améliorer la connectivité avec et exercer un
plus grand contrôle sur ces entités non-humaines, afin d’éviter le potentiel dangereux de leur agentivité, et ainsi
participer plus en sécurité aux échanges économiques avec les Blancs. La conversion de l’argent en sel, ou le
mouvement à travers les mondes de connectivité, devient faisable grâce à ces manipulations stratégiques
d’agentivité, qui ont servi aux capitaines andoque et aux membres ordinaires, ainsi qu’aux clans, pour naviguer
dans les échanges prédateurs et commerciaux avec les acteurs non-humains et non-autochtones dans les divers
contextes passés et contemporains explorés tout au long de cette thèse.

Conclusion : L’identité agnatique et l’animisme hiérarchique en Amazonie

Ma définition dans cette thèse du pouvoir comme échange asymétrique m’a permis de tracer les
continuités entre les relations de pouvoir interhumaines et celles impliquant les humains et les nonhumains. Elle m’a également permis d’englober simultanément le fort ethos commercial des Andoque,
les dimensions de don des objets circulants, et la logique prédatrice qui imprègne leur cosmologie et
leurs compréhensions quotidiennes. Le concept d’échange, qui suppose un minimum de trois
participants—deux qui échangent et un échangé—a ouvert la voie à la considération des personnes non
seulement comme sujets de l’échange mais aussi comme les échangés, comme on le voit avec les

662

orphelins humains échangés contre des haches et les orphelins non-humains contre des offrandes
végétales. Dans de tels contextes variés, en utilisant la distinction entre homosubstitution et
hétérosubstitution, j’ai illustré comment le pouvoir est à la fois fondé sur et facilite les manipulations
ontologiques et la dégradation de l’agentivité parmi les êtres humains et non-humains pour s’engager
dans le commerce hétérosubstitutif avec les Blancs et éviter les dommages des représailles
homosubstitutives par les non-humains. En me basant sur les conceptions cosmo-spatiales des Andoque,
j’ai démontré comment le pouvoir d’un centre fluvial donné repose sur l’altérité et les forces associées à
la source de la rivière pour s’établir, naviguer dans les relations avec d’autres centres, qu’ils soient
humains ou non-humains, et avec l’embouchure, qui est associée aux Blancs. Mon analyse de la
mythologie Andoque et de ses implications pratiques, ainsi que le sentiment des gens d’être abasourdis
lorsqu’ils sont confrontés aux êtres fi’du—ou à l’argent, comme je l’ai suggéré—révèle que la
symbolisation dans l’ontologie Andoque dépasse la simple représentation des objets dans la réalité. Elle
fonctionne comme un instrument de pouvoir, servant à contenir cet objet (ou sujet), révélant ses
potentiels et ses vulnérabilités, dans le but de le maîtriser. Dans ce contexte, la notion de descendance
agnatique est primordiale, car le protagoniste dans l’effort de symboliser le monde et de le rendre
gérable est le patriclan. Contrairement aux considérations conventionnelles de l’agentivité dans les
sciences sociales et la théorie politique qui réservent cette faculté aux humains, ma thèse a souligné à
plusieurs reprises un modèle de socialité où l’interaction entre deux individus inclut invariablement un
acteur non-humain supplémentaire. Cet élargissement du domaine social introduit un niveau d’instabilité
dans les asymétries de pouvoir au sein de relations spécifiques, car ces asymétries dépendent des
déséquilibres préalablement établis entre les acteurs humains et non-humains, qui peuvent changer en
raison d’événements au sein de cette ou d’autres relations interhumaines impliquant le même participant
humain. Une conclusion centrale de cette thèse est la corrélation entre l’idéologie agnatique et la
réduction de l’agentivité, ou la quasi-objectification, des affins. Alors que Costa et Fausto précisent leur
préférence pour le terme de « dominance » sur celui de « domination » dans leur défense de la maîtrise
comme un idiome pour comprendre les relations asymétriques amazoniennes, je soutiens que l’exercice
du pouvoir par les Andoque à travers la version « agnatique » de la familiarisation et de la maîtrise, qui
conduit parfois à une plus grande réduction de l’agentivité et à la subordination de compagnons
conceptualisés comme orphelins, frôle en effet la domination. Cela suggère de remettre en question la
position de l’animisme des Andoque sur un spectre qui s’étend de l’animisme égalitaire à l’animisme
hiérarchique. Mon étude a également offert des perspectives supplémentaires sur l’histoire récente des

663

Peuples du Centre. Alors que les anthropologues des Peuples du Centre ont mis en avant la moralité
comme le facteur clé expliquant un écart ontologique perçu et des asymétries inhérentes entre
l’humanité et la non-humanité, l’ambiguïté du discours moral parmi les Andoque m’a permis de
découvrir la logique prédatrice sous-jacente et de démontrer comment cet écart est activement produit et
est continu avec les asymétries parmi les agents humains. Mes conclusions suggèrent que l’histoire
récente des Peuples du Centre impliquait également un mouvement tectonique entre deux conceptions
de parenté concurrentes—réciprocité affine et continuité agnatique. En conceptualisant la hiérarchie
capitaine-orphelin en termes d’agentivité et en explorant le lien entre le patriclan, ses origines et ses
traditions avec l’agentivité de ses membres, mon analyse mène à une conclusion de type hégélien : la
hiérarchie capitaine-orphelin est une manifestation particulière de l’ambition perpétuelle des individus à
utiliser les affins et les membres d’autres clans pour atteindre les objectifs définis par leur origine
lorsque cette ambition ne rencontre aucune agentivité substantielle pour s’y opposer. Par conséquence,
l’agentivité de l’autre affinal peut être diminuée mais jamais totalement éteinte. Ainsi, l’asymétrie
ontologique croissante entre les humains et les non-humains doit être considérée dans le contexte de la
tension évolutive entre l’identité de clan et la réciprocité affine. Cela nous pousse à élargir la portée
géographique de notre discussion aux peuples tucano-arawakiens de l’Amazonie nord-ouest, qui sont
généralement notés dans l’anthropologie régionale pour leurs échanges réciproques avec les nonhumains analogues à leurs échanges affins réciproques entre différents groupes linguistiques. Cela
contraste fortement avec les efforts des Peuples du Centre pour nier la réciprocité avec les animaux,
qu’ils considèrent avec aversion. Compte tenu des similitudes et des différences entre les Peuples du
Centre et leurs voisins tucano-arawakiens, je suggère qu’en Amazonie nord-ouest, il existe un spectre
d’idéologies : certaines privilégient exclusivement l’identité et la hiérarchie du patriclan, tandis que
d’autres les complètent par la réciprocité affine, chacune correspondant à des perspectives différentes
sur les non-humains et leur agentivité. Un accent prononcé sur l’échange affin avec les humains et les
non-humains, comme on le voit chez les peuples tucanoans, tend à concorder avec une plus grande
symétrie ontologique. En revanche, un fort accent sur la continuité patrilinéaire, avec moins de
mécanismes en place pour assurer la réciprocité affine, peut conduire à des asymétries ontologiques.
Néanmoins, il est à noter que l’univers tucano-arawakien n’est pas non plus dépourvu d’asymétrie
ontologique. Comme cette asymétrie a des connotations clairement agnatiques, la présence et la force
des mécanismes qui contrebalancent les pratiques liées à l’agnatisme et les divers degrés d’asymétrie
entre les humains et les non-humains qu’elles impliquent sont significatives. Mon étude démontre que

664

les échanges hétérosubstitutifs—une caractéristique de l’animisme hiérarchique—se produisent dans les
basses terres de l’Amérique du Sud avec des objets autochtones, et non seulement ceux introduits par
des agents non-autochtones, et ainsi, l’animisme peut coexister avec la hiérarchie comme en Asie du
Sud-Est. Je soutiens que la domestication et la culture des plantes, et non seulement l’élevage des
animaux comme argumenté pour l’Asie du Sud-Est, peuvent également sous-tendre l’animisme
hiérarchique et l’hétérosubstitution qu’il facilite, particulièrement lorsqu’ils sont liés à des conceptions
de descendance agnatique. L’« agnatisation » des plantes, telle qu’elle se reflète dans la pratique et la
mythologie andoque, représente une relation plus dominante avec ces plantes que les actes courants
d’appropriation amazonienne, et permet finalement une plus grande liberté dans le commerce de leurs
dérivés. Étant donné les conceptions andoque de hiérarchie qui ne se reflètent pas pleinement dans les
cultes ancestraux et les pratiques similaires, je suggère que l’animisme des Andoque se situe à michemin entre l’animisme égalitaire et l’animisme hiérarchique, qui s’inspire de tels cultes. Enfin, malgré
le déclin de l’institution de la chefferie, la logique hétérosubstitutive qui la sous-tend reste omniprésente
dans le cosmos et la société andoque. Les propriétaires et les membres ordinaires sont toujours vus
comme des capitaines qui gèrent les orphelins ou des plantes échangeables.

665

