Fuente: John J. Sánchez y William A. Posada,, «Old and modern volcanic depictions as evidence of communities-volcanoes mutualism in Colombia», Andean Geology 51 (1), 2024, secciones 4.2-4.5.
URL: https://www.andeangeology.cl/index.php/revista1/article/view/V51n1-3667/html
Extraído: 2026-09-22

The sketches drawn from the  pictographs and petroglyphs vary among authors, but very often it is possible  to identify motifs that convey the idea of volcanism, even when the figures  differ. For example, in the case of the Piedra de Guagua Rayo petroglyph (Genoy  locality, Pasto) (Supplementary materials 2 and 4), we identified just to the  left of the anthropomorphic figure a triangle with two of its sides projected  upwards (Fig. 5). Cárdenas (1988) drew, for the same area, a mixed motif that  looks very volcanic: a triangle with two sides that are projected upwards to  form a complex figure. This overall consistency with our independent  observations supports the suggestion of volcanic depictions being present in  the rock art of Nariño.
    FIG. 5. The Piedra de Guagua Rayo petroglyph, also known  as the Vuelta Larga petroglyph (Genoy locality, Pasto). A. Photo  of the site, numbered arrows point to motifs mentioned in the text (1:  Anthropomorphic figure representing the Guagua Rayo; 2: A triangle with  two of its sides projecting upwards, a motif that is reminiscent of volcano  shape). The rock face is roughly 8 m tall. B. A field sketch of the  distinguishable motifs. The inset at the lower right shows, for comparison,  enhanced versions of the sketch by Cárdenas (1988) and the one marked by number  2 in panel A (this work). 
When dealing with rock art,  interpretations on the meaning of the motifs are highly hypothetical, i.e.,  there is not a unique explanation. Our somewhat arbitrary ideas of simple  forms, such as the triangle, as representative of volcanoes could also be  replaced by the notion that the triangle is a recurrent figure because it is  basic, so it can be used to construct more complex designs. According to López (2014), the  triangle denotes integration, complementarity, and origin. 
Despite the aforementioned ideas,  the example presented in figure 5 strongly suggests a relationship with  volcanism that goes beyond any speculation derived from our ethnocentric view.  Although the Quechuan toponymy of Urcunina, one of the most recent volcanoes of  the Galeras Volcanic Complex and the older indigenous name given to the younger  Galeras Volcano, translates as “mountain of fire” or “mountain that spews  fire”; in the indigenous thinking of the region the volcano does not exist as a  fire, earthquake, and ash-producing phenomenon, but as high place inhabited by  spirits where earth and water are periodically produced. In this way, the  representation of water, or the high place, or that of a magical being is also  a depiction of the volcanic phenomenon, which could also be represented by  anthropomorphic figures like the ones included in the El Higuerón pictograph,  Piedra de Guagua Rayo petroglyph or the Mantel de Piedra petroglyph. Another  consideration is that most of the motifs are abstract, at least those in the  rock art sites closer to volcanoes. Although there is great difficulty in  recognizing on rock art the clear manifestation of volcanoes or volcanic  activity, surely volcanoes represent a sacred entity because of their  relationship to the origin myths, to the presence of pre-Columbian burial  places around volcanoes, and to evidence of cosmic (spirals, stars, the sun),  humanoid and exotic (monkeys) designs on near-volcano rock art representations.
The myths and legends also convey  the idea of volcanism, though in a more complex way, coded within the stories,  the words, and expressions that only locals understand, and the metaphorical  allusions to the Earth, the mountains, and possible eruptive activity (see  Supplementary material 3 for the list compiled in this study). For example, in  the Mapachico locality (Pasto), locals know about the tale of  Juan Rayo or Guagua Rayo (The  Lightning Boy), a boy-like character that was born during a lightning, who upon  transforming into the Galeras (Urcunina) volcano is seen as the patriarch and  origin of all the inhabitants of the region (Cepeda, 2020). This character  indeed occupies a central place in rock art sites like the Mantel de Piedra (Altar Cloth Stone) and Piedra de Guagua Rayo (Lightning Boy Stone)  petroglyphs (Fig. 5, Supplementary materials 2 and 4). Likewise, oral tradition  and written stories persistently mention El Taita Galeras or Urcunina (Galeras the Elder), a very powerful and temperamental, yet benign entity, that  must be respected or else face the consequences of his anger. There is also a  balancing female character that has taken root among the inhabitants of the  communities around Galeras volcano: La Virgen del Rosario (The Virgin of  the Rosary), presumably the only one able to calm down the volcano when is  erupting.
4.3. The El  Higuerón pictograph
Among the  rock art sites reported in Supplementary material 2, two pictographs are well  known in the literature: The Piedra de los Monos (Potosí,  southern Nariño, near the Ecuadorian border) and El Higuerón (northeastern Nariño, near Genoy locality, Pasto), the latter being of special  interest to our study because, according to literature, it included a  figurative depiction of Galeras volcano in activity (Rodríguez, 1992; Quijano,  2009). Quijano (2009) referred, among many other symbols, to “a mountain-shaped  figure with three wavy lines, like a smoking volcano”. Graphic information  about this peculiar feature varied among sources (they were all hand-made  drawings) and only two low-resolution photographs were available in unpublished  sources. Analysis of these images revealed, firstly, that it was unclear  whether the symbol was actually a volcano in activity; and second, that “the  mountain” outline was actually the upper limit of a fracture with an arched  form. Direct visual inspection of the El Higuerón was not possible because the  pictograph was not there, at least not in its entirety (see Supplementary  material 2). Its disappearance could have been caused by the Higuerón tree roots (Ficus sp.) and mosses which partially covered the rock where  the paintings were located, simultaneously destroying some parts of the rock by  mechanical fracturing.
Fortunately, our guide and  hostess in the Mapachico locality (Indigenous Governor Sonia Gómez) was the  sister of Diógenes A. Gómez. Mr. Gómez is a local artist who knew the site  where the El Higuerón pictograph was, dedicating part his Master´s  thesis to the analysis of it (Gómez, 2017). He agreed to meet with us, and  through his direct impressions on this pictograph we could independently  confirm that there was a motif suggestive of Galeras volcano with wavy lines on  its top. He also agreed to produce a canvas painting with his memories of the  pictograph (Fig. 6).
    FIG. 6. Canvas painting by Diógenes A. Gómez showing Galeras volcano in  activity (background) and a fragment of the dihedral rock where El Higuerón pictograph was made (foreground, white rectangle). On the left side of the  rock, the motif representing the volcano is the arched black feature with  zigzag or wavy yellow and red lines on top (white circle). Both the volcanic  motif, as well as the anthropomorphic figure beneath it, have been enclosed in  a white circle for clarity. A similar anthropomorphic figure appears in the  forehead of the indigenous character that is painting the pictograph. The  pictograph was drawn on two nearly perpendicular rock faces and contained  several other motifs. Mr. Gómez is considered a reliable direct witness of the  existence of the pictograph, which was originally reported in Cabrera (1966),  Granda (1983), and Quijano (2009).
4.4. What is the likely age of pictographs like El  Higuerón or Piedra de Los Monos?
If indeed the motif in El  Higuerón pictograph represented the volcano with some activity, the timing  of these rock art examples is relevant as well. The pictographs are located  within the territories previously occupied by the Quillacingas (El Higuerón)  and the Pastos (Piedra de Los Monos), descendants of the Protopastos people whose chronology has been situated between ~1,000 and 1,500 CE (Uribe  and Cabrera, 1988; Tapia, 2006). Archaeological research in the Carchi Province  (northern Ecuador) (Uhle, 1933; Grijalva, 1937; Jijón y Caamaño; 1951)2  established three ceramic-style groups: Capulí, Piartal, and Tuza (Francisco,  1969). In Colombia, more recent works kept the same ceramic-based names for the  archaeological groups (Cardale, 1978; Plazas, 1978; Uribe, 1978; Uribe and  Lleras, 1983; Groot and Hooykaas, 1991). The chronologies for these  archaeological groups have been revised with 14C dating of various  materials found associated to ceramics (Uribe, 1992; Cárdenas, 2020). A summary  is presented in table 2.
Given the location of the El  Higuerón (northeast flank of Galeras volcano) and Los Monos pictographs (near Potosí in southern Nariño) (Fig. 1, Supplementary material  2), and considering the spatial and temporal contexts proposed for the Piartal  and Tuza groups (Groot and Hooykaas, 1991), one could think that El Higuerón Pictograph may date back to the VI century, whereas the Piedra de Los  Monos pictograph may be more recent, perhaps even belonging to the XVI  century. There are two caveats regarding the previously presented idea. First,  there is a significant difference in the iconographies of what is assumed as  Pasto and Quillacinga (Piartal-Tuza); second, the El Higuerón pictograph  may represent a society of hunters and gatherers (because of the documented  anthropomorphic figure with a spear; see figure 6, a cultural economy that does  not match either the Pastos or the Quillacingas, according to the  archaeological studies and the chronicles of the Spanish conquerors  (References). Considering the techniques (several colors, that could indicate  differences in ethnic groups) and the figure that represents a hunter holding a  spear (Figs. 2 and 6), it seems clear that the El Higuerón pictograph  may belong to a different epoch, probably older than Piedra de Los Monos.  Taking this into account, the El Higuerón pictograph may be pre-ceramic.
These very crude ideas on the  chronology of the El Higuerón pictograph could gain some acceptance if  we consider the late geologic evolution of the Galeras Volcanic Complex. Based  on volcano-stratigraphy and 14C dating, Calvache (1995) and Calvache et al. (1997) found that Urcunina Volcano -the last eruptive stage  before young Galeras Volcano- endured a catastrophic summit collapse of  its western flank, sometime between ~12.8 and 5 ka BP, that generated a large  debris avalanche deposit in the Azufral River valley; this age range fits the  possible timing of early occupations in this part of South America  (Mayer-Oakes, 1996; Gnecco, 2000; Nami and Stanford, 2016). During the last  ~4,500 years, abundant activity of Galeras Volcano has been documented, including  important eruptions that took place around the IX century (~1.1 ka BP) with  surges, pyroclastic flows, lahars, and lava flows mainly emplaced towards the  eastern and northeastern flanks of the volcano (Calvache, 1990), including the  areas of the current Genoy and Mapachico localities. It is thus plausible that  the aforementioned events or similar eruptions that took place between the  collapse of Urcunina (12.8-5 ka BP) and 1.1 ka BP could have inspired the  ancestral artist that painted the volcano.
4.5. Integrating the old and the new depictions to  understand communities-volcanoes mutualism
We have documented a number of  modern occurrences of volcanic depictions in Colombia (Supplementary material  1) and focused on the State of Nariño to seek older forms of figurative and  non-figurative representations (Supplementary materials 2, 3, and 4). The data  compiled and analyzed in this study reveals a variety of purposes, and  stylistic and spatial-temporal characteristics deemed here as relevant to the  understanding of the relationship between volcanoes and the communities. 
For  modern depictions we see a dominance of the figurative or naturalistic ones and  only a few cases of abstract forms of volcanoes. Many of the depictions are  related to art and decoration (these two uses are quite related, as many  decorative murals can be seen as art). Active polygenetic volcanoes are  represented most of the time, but a few inactive monogenetic volcanoes have  been adopted as icons or symbols for small municipalities, e.g., Colimba  dome for the Guachucal municipality (Nariño) and Cerro Tusa and Cerro El Sillón  for the Venecia municipality (Antioquia). The temporal character among the  depictions vary, with some being included in the coats of arms or flags of  municipalities-which means they are part of the heritage of those cities- and will be preserved and remain seen for a long time; whereas others are more  ephemeral and will last for a shorter period of time, perhaps decades, because  they are subjected to weathering or are images used for commercial purposes. In  any case, it appears that people depict volcanoes, near and far, to convey  their own perception of the volcanic form or of the volcanic phenomena; in  doing this, they show that volcanoes are relevant to them, and, most  importantly, manifest their sense of belonging to their territory.
For older depictions, our  findings reveal that rock art sites in the State of Nariño include motifs that  are reminiscent of volcanism located at average distances from volcanoes (~17  km) that are similar to those determined for modern depictions (~19 km), thus  integrating old and modern cases, depictions are expected to be found within  ~18 km of a volcano. 
Regarding the time character of  depictions, rock art lasts longer (several millennia?) as opposed to the  relatively short life span of modern representations. Older depictions focused  on the abstract and the symbolic, and it is difficult to assess their purpose  or their use, as opposed to the modern cases. By analyzing the outlines of  modern depictions (Fig. 4; Supplementary material 1), however, we find some  possible linking traits to the older cases, namely the use of simple shapes  like triangles, broken or zigzag lines, arched lines (see, for example, Cruz  and Yaqueno, 2023), that in the past may have also been intended to depict  volcanism. That simple motifs like triangles or arched lines were used by the  ancestral inhabitants as symbolic depictions of volcanoes makes sense if we  consider the conditions under which they were produced: primitive tools,  slippery and steep rocky surfaces, and basic materials; conditions that  required simplicity in the etchings and drawings. Geometric shapes represent  better the connectivity and balance that persist in the indigenous thinking  (López, 2014). Whether the designs left on rocks were intended to represent  volcanism remains as an open question, because visual design is characterized  by its intentionality, but it may be oriented towards the aesthetic, the  semantics, or other ends (Leroi-Gourhan, 1971). Also, the identification of the  link between a pictograph or petroglyph maker and the reality they lived in is  a complex process because the relationship among aesthetics, design, and the  environment or the society is multidimensional (Duncan, 1992).
Oral tradition demonstrates  that volcanoes are important not only because of the natural resources they  offer, but also because of the supernatural connotation they have, which gives  them some kind of “conscience”. In the folk tales documented here there exist  reiterative mention to magic beings and spirits related to volcanoes  (Supplementary material 3). This means that volcanoes are deeply rooted in the  symbolic and spiritual systems of people as some kind of volcanic animism or  totemic thinking (that is, volcanoes not only are to be protected but also  respected and venerated). These kinds of ingrained spiritual links between a  community and the land have been named “telluric thinking” (Vasco, 2002). In  the case of Genoy, its inhabitants recognize Juan Rayo (Lighting Boy) in  the Piedra de Guagua Rayo petroglyph (Fig. 5; Supplementary materials 2 and 4) as well as in the Mantel de Piedra petroglyph, establishing a  direct link between their ancestral origin, Galeras volcano, and their  territory (Perugache, 2017). Folk tales also persistently allude to the  lightning, the thunder, the fire, even to the boiling stones. All of these  imply that, when provoked, the sacred raging volcanoes are capable of terrible  things, a concept well known to other “volcanic” cultures as well (Broda,  2009). In case of eruption, intervention from a very powerful equal would be  needed to soothe them (the water, the Virgin of the Rosary). Thus, for people  like the inhabitants of the Mapachico locality, mountain visitors are welcomed  so long as they ask for permission before trekking or climbing, remain silent,  and do not affect the environment in any way. Such beliefs so deeply rooted  among the indigenous inhabitants play a critical role during times of volcanic  unrest (e.g., earthquakes, increased gas emissions, ground deformation,  ash emissions, explosions), because they firmly rely on the fact that as they  have lived there for generations nothing bad will happen to them; because that  although the Guagua Rayo may be furious, the Virgin of the Rosary is on  their side.
4.6. Limitations of the interpretations and  questions for further research
In this study we provided data  on the spatial and temporal nature of volcanic depictions in Colombia with an  emphasis on the State of Nariño, and put forward some ideas to guide future  research on both modern and old representations. Naturally, our research faced  some limitations related to site accessibility, the preservation (or lack  thereof) of rock art sites, impossibility to document all occurrences of  depictions in such a large area, and particularly the absence of  geochronological data to constrain the age of the pictographs. These  shortcomings, however, can guide future research through questions like: Why  were older representations mostly symbolic? Did simple symbols like triangles  and arched lines really represent volcanoes? What was their purpose? Why were  they done in such inaccessible places? Do modern depictions maintain some  traits inherited from older depictions? What does art in other types of  ancestral and modern objects (ceramics, textiles, filigree, and gold/silver  smithing) tell us about volcanic depictions? Additional data and research will  take us nearer to some of the answers and in this way closer to furthering our  understanding of the relationship between people and their volcanoes.
