Curt Nimuendajú, The Tukuna (1952), p. 22 (líneas 1025-1040 del texto completo) y pp. 130-131: nota sobre el vatu del venado y leyenda del origen de la yuca dulce. Extracto de content/editorial/ticuna/busqueda-2026-09-19/nimuendaju-1952-the-tukuna.txt.
the stone ax, whose appearance no one now remembers, but which, according to
legend, the culture hero dyoi' stole from the demon tointa [tUin'ta] (see page 131).
   The four species of major importance for the Tukuna are bitter manioc, mandioca
brava (Manihot utitissima), sweet manioc, macaxera (M. aipi),' maize, and yam,
card (Dioscorea sp.).' Lacking any one of these four, the Tukuna have a bad time
of it, whereas the absence of other edible tubers, such as the sweet potato, and of
other plants like sugar cane, pineapple, peanut (manduvi),' and so on, affects them
very little.
   According to legend, a solitary old woman discovered both the tree which fur-
nished macaxera-like fruits and the art of making manioc flat cakes, beiju's. On
learning the secret, the men felled the tree and ate up everything; only Deer kept
shoots and seeds in a basket (vatu') of which the culture hero dyoi' later robbed him
 (see p. 131). For this reason the Tukuna refer to a cultivated plant as a pre-
Columbian possession by saying that "it first came in Deer's vatu'."
   Formerly, only sweet manioc was known to them; apparently bitter manioc and
the process of making manioc flour were introduced by the Neobrazilians.

Father of Warts from his compartment. He waited until a great chunk of kindling was well
ablaze, seized it, dealt the Father of Warts a blow in the belly, and fled with the fire. It was some
time before the vietim was able to call his foster mother. When she learned what had happened,
she hunted for the ax in order to cut the log ladder leading to the earth, but, since she could not
find the tool at once, dyoi' had already reached the earth with his firebrand by the time she finally
succeeded in cutting the lianas seeuring the ladder.
  According to another version, dyoi' himself destroyed the ladder because he saw
that many people preferred the upper world and were migrating there. "Why do
you want to move to the upper world? Your place is here on earth !" he said, and
ordered the ladder destroyed. dyoi' also invented the friction fire sticks of cupu'
do matto wood.
  Still another version of the origin of fire is found in the following legend.
                            The Acquisition of Cultivated Plants
An old woman lived alone and far away from other people. She had a hard time of it, since the
Indians of that period did not yet know of sweet manioc. One day she observed some safiva ants
carrying a white substance. She took a piece and smelled it. "What an agreeable smell I " she said.
She followed the ants until she came to the edge of a pool in the igarap6, where on the bank was a
large tree bearing all kinds of sweet manioc fruits. These fell into the water, where they got
softened.
  She took a piece, placed it in her armpit, and dried it by her own body heat. Afterward she tried
the dried substance and liked it. She gathered a large quantity, dried it in the sun, and took it
                                  Nimuendaju': The Tukuna                                     131
home. One day her grandchildren came to visit her and ate of it. They thought it delicious and
asked their grandmother where she had got it. However, the old woman would not tell them; when
they persisted, she only answered that it was a present from ta-e'. She had a crony, the nocturnal
swallow [bacurao], which had fire in its beak. The two no longer dried the sweet manioe in their
armpits or in the sun, but secretly made fire and baked manioc flat cakes in the oven. Everyone
who had a chance to try these found them excellent, but when people inquired about their prepa-
ration, the old woman merely answered that they were baked in the sun. When the swallow heard
this lie from the old woman, she could not resist laughing, and the flames burst from her mouth.
Seeing this, some of those present thought: "Has she fire in her mouth "
   One day a boy noticed the old woman take fire from the night swallow's mouth and light the fire
under the oven. When he told the others this, they decided to take the fire away from the swallow,
bacurao. But she, seeing so many people coming, quickly removed all the fire from under the oven
and placed it in her mouth, which she stubbornly refused to open. Finally, the men pried open her
beak by force and removed the fire. This is why swallows have such gaping beaks.
  However, they still did not know where the sweet manioc came from. At last one man secretly
followed the old woman and saw the tree bearing the fruit. Back at the house, he again asked the
old woman whence the substance came; when she refused to tell, he informed her that he already
knew where she got it and from which tree it was. He took the others to the spot, and they not
only picked all the fruit but dug up all the roots as well. The tree died and fell, and no one had
sweet manioc thereafter.
   The deer had been coming to the tree, had seen what the men were doing, and had broken off
branches of all kinds with slips, which he kept covered in his basket. dyQi' and his companions
were fishing with timb6 in the igarap6 when the deer came by; slung from his body was his covered
basket, which he never let out of his sight. A little way off he sat down and ate. As soon as he had
finished and gone away, dyoi' went to examine the spot, where he found several bits of sweet
manioc, yams, and potatoes. He tried them and thought highly of the deer's food.
   Then he shouted behind him, "We are going home now! Don't you want to gather the fish we
have left in the water?" and pretended to leave with his companions. But he returned secretly and
transformed himself into a tree by the riverbank, extending his arms as branches over the surface
of the water.
   The deer came, saw that many dead fish still remained in the igarap6, and entered the water. But
his covered basket hindered him, so he finally hung it on one of the branches overhanging the
igarape. dyoi' made the dead fish float downstream with the current and, when the deer went after
them, seized the basket and made off with it. The deer, seeing this, cried, "So it was dyoi"s arm?
Well, I'll help you anyway I Plant in a new clearing I "
   dyoi' took the basket to his companions. Opening it, they found that the top was full of a
quantity of sweet manioc and yam tubers, and potatoes, and below this they found the slips and
seeds of all cultivated plants. They ate the tubers and planted the slips and seeds according to the
deer's instructions.
                               The Acquisition of the Stone Ax
A benign spirit in human form named tuil'ta owned the stone ax, with which he used to knock on
