Fuente: Nimuendajú, Curt. The Tukuna. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 45, Berkeley, 1952, pp. 146-147 («The One-legged Man», en «Legends of demons and monsters»). Extracto de content/editorial/ticuna/busqueda-2026-09-19/nimuendaju-1952-the-tukuna.txt, líneas 6958-7004.
straw of the roof thatch and put out his [tu'6uru's] eyes. tu'furu fell; as his belly struck the
ground it burst, and he died.3

                                     The One-legged Man
Two brothers were hunting in the jungle in order to collect the necessary meat for a feast. They
had already a lot of game on the smoking-grill. One day while walking through the forest they
came to a cleared spot beneath a tree where there was a leaf container made of assahy, and in
it a quarter of roast pig and a few cooked yams. The first brother passed it by, but the second
halted. "Do not touch it!" cried the elder brother. "Surely it must belong to some demon [AQ'] ."
But the other, letting his brother go forward a few paces, secretly filched a yam and ate it.
   "By any chance did you eat the demon's foodt" asked his brother. "No," the younger replied,
"I only looked at it!" That night they were sleeping in their shelter. Suddenly the one who had
rejected the food heard a ba'e [demon] coming through the jungle, shouting, "Where is my
foodt" And the yam in the belly of the other, who still slept, cried out, "I am herel" In vain
the elder brother tried to wake the younger, who continued to sleep even though he was poked
with a blazing resinous torch. Then the elder hid beneath the ridgepole of the shelter. The ba'e
arrived, cut open the door of the shelter with his nails, which were as sharp as knives, and in
the same way cut off a leg of the sleeper, threw it over his shoulder, and disappeared.
   Only a long time afterward did the sleeper awake, and then he cried, "My brother, the bats
have eaten my leg!" "No," answered the first. "It was the owner of the yam that you ate!" He
took his brother on his back and carried him through the jungle to a tree called gY'tine [l.g.,
uequy t] He salved the wound with the juice of this tree, placed both hands on the tree trunk,
and danced all round the tree in this position with his brother on his back, singing "goYtine, make
my brother's leg grow again!" Then he carried him to the foot of another gaYtine tree, where he
repeated the same performance, continuing this treatment for several weeks. The leg slowly began
to regenerate and soon had grown to just below the knee.
   The elder brother's wife waited vainly at home for the return of her husband and brother-in-
law. The date set for the feast had already passed, and they still had not returned. She became
exceedingly vexed and finally went into the jungle to search for them. She met her husband with
his brother on his back, still dancing round a goYtine tree. Enraged, she pushed him, making him
fall with the cripple, for he was very weak from the prolonged effort of dancing. In the fall,
the growing leg of the brother, which had not yet become firm, broke. Then the younger brother
refused to accompany the couple back to their house. He advised his sister-in-law to plant maize
for the feast, because the game which they had collected had already spoiled, and he remained
alone in the jungle.
   After the feast his brother came to visit him. He made a platform on which he placed the
cripple, visiting him from time to time. He noticed that his brother grew smaller each time he
 came; finally, the latter began to sprout feathers and was transformed into a va:'e [a hawk that
   8 For the final fate of meta're, see the legend "The Origin of the Lunar Areole," pp. 135-136.
                                 Nimuendaju': The Tukuna                                       147
cries at the onset of summer]. When the elder brother again came to visit him, the younger said
"Now I shall fly to the mountains of the Lower Amazon! 6/vina v: 'eI ta-to-to-to v : 'eI" ["My
sister-in-law, plant I Plant I"]. With this, he rose and flew away.
  There are noteworthy differences in the version of this legend given to me in
1929 by "Captain" Felix. The explanation of the mutilation of Orion's leg is quite
different from that given me by my informants in 1941 and 1942. (See legend,
"The Errors of cimjdyuV'.")
