Curt Nimuendajú, The Tukuna, ed. Robert H. Lowie, trad. William D. Hohenthal, University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 45, Berkeley, 1952, pp. 146-150. Extracto copiado de content/editorial/ticuna/busqueda-2026-09-19/nimuendaju-1952-the-tukuna.txt (líneas 6975-7200), que salió del PDF de la Digital Anthropology Library de UC Berkeley.

the same way cut off a leg of the sleeper, threw it over his shoulder, and disappeared.
   Only a long time afterward did the sleeper awake, and then he cried, "My brother, the bats
have eaten my leg!" "No," answered the first. "It was the owner of the yam that you ate!" He
took his brother on his back and carried him through the jungle to a tree called gY'tine [l.g.,
uequy t] He salved the wound with the juice of this tree, placed both hands on the tree trunk,
and danced all round the tree in this position with his brother on his back, singing "goYtine, make
my brother's leg grow again!" Then he carried him to the foot of another gaYtine tree, where he
repeated the same performance, continuing this treatment for several weeks. The leg slowly began
to regenerate and soon had grown to just below the knee.
   The elder brother's wife waited vainly at home for the return of her husband and brother-in-
law. The date set for the feast had already passed, and they still had not returned. She became
exceedingly vexed and finally went into the jungle to search for them. She met her husband with
his brother on his back, still dancing round a goYtine tree. Enraged, she pushed him, making him
fall with the cripple, for he was very weak from the prolonged effort of dancing. In the fall,
the growing leg of the brother, which had not yet become firm, broke. Then the younger brother
refused to accompany the couple back to their house. He advised his sister-in-law to plant maize
for the feast, because the game which they had collected had already spoiled, and he remained
alone in the jungle.
   After the feast his brother came to visit him. He made a platform on which he placed the
cripple, visiting him from time to time. He noticed that his brother grew smaller each time he
 came; finally, the latter began to sprout feathers and was transformed into a va:'e [a hawk that
   8 For the final fate of meta're, see the legend "The Origin of the Lunar Areole," pp. 135-136.
                                 Nimuendaju': The Tukuna                                       147
cries at the onset of summer]. When the elder brother again came to visit him, the younger said
"Now I shall fly to the mountains of the Lower Amazon! 6/vina v: 'eI ta-to-to-to v : 'eI" ["My
sister-in-law, plant I Plant I"]. With this, he rose and flew away.
  There are noteworthy differences in the version of this legend given to me in
1929 by "Captain" Felix. The explanation of the mutilation of Orion's leg is quite
different from that given me by my informants in 1941 and 1942. (See legend,
"The Errors of cimjdyuV'.")
                                        wiYkica (Orion)'
Two brothers found themselves deep in the jungle at the foot of a tree where there was a basket
containing cooked potatoes. The elder of the two passed it by, but the younger could not resist
temptation and ate one of the tubers. That night as they slept, the demon nguri [(?) unknown
to my other informants], who owned the basket, came through the jungle shouting, "Where is
my potatoI" And from the younger brother's stomach came the reply, "I am hereI"
   The elder brother sprang up and tried to wake the other, but the younger slept as though dead,
not even stirring when the former poked him with a blazing firebrand. Then the elder hid in the
loft of the shelter, while nguri eame and tore off a leg from the sleeping brother, taking it with
him to devour. After his departure, the sleeper awoke and, seeing the bloody stump, exclaimed,
"Brother, the bats have eaten my leg!" The other answered, "It was not bats but the demon
nguri, whose potatoes you ateI"
   Then the younger asked his brother to make him a club and, carried on the latter's back, left
the shelter. While they were going through the jungle, an agouti ran in front of them, and at
onee the younger brother asked to be let down. He hopped after the agouti-on one leg only,
but just as quickly as he could have done with two-and killed the little creature with his club.
He cut off a small piece of meat from the kill, wrapped it in leaves, and handed it to his brother.
After they had gone on a while, a deer sprang up, which the cripple killed in the same fashion.
Again he cut off only a small piece of the game, wrapped it in leaves, and handed it to his brother.
   When they arrived home, his [the younger brother's] wife was vexed at the smallness of the
pieces, but her husband ordered her to erect a huge smoking-grill with a bonfire kindled under
it. Then he unwrapped the meat and threw the bits to the woman; instantly they became so large
that they completely covered her.
   Afterward he ordered that they carry him again to the jungle, where this time he killed a
tapir. He waited beside the kill for the buzzards to come, and when they had all gathered, he
said to the king of the buzzards, "I killed this game for you, but now you must take me with
you to the upper worldl" Then the buzzards took him with them to the upper world, where he
can still be seen today: wfi6ka (Orion).

                          The Family Transformed into Jaguars
An old man set out with his wife and several other men, I know not whither-I think toward
the underworld. The old man taught the others a magical trick: whenever he shot an arrow high
into the trunk of a tururi tree,5 a white strip of bast the breadth of a palm would detach itself
and peel down the trunk all the way to the ground. Each person selected a piece, stretched it,
and painted it with black spots in imitation of a jaguar's hide, thus making himself a jaguar
costume. Putting these costumes on, they turned into jaguars and, as such, coursed through the
jungle, killing and eating people; but other Indians discovered the secret and considered how
to kill them. Once the old man in jaguar form attacked a group of hunters, but was killed by one
of them. His wife overheard them talking about the one who had done the killing, and she resolved
to avenge her husband's death. Dressed in her jaguar costume, she pursued the slayer and tore
him to pieces.
  The old woman's son had two children. One day she went with some hunters to a spot in the
jungle where there were some envieira trees [Xylopia sp.1] on the fruit of which toucans were
  4 Nimuendajf, Tukuna-Indianern, p. 191.
  5 The inner bark of this tree (Couratari sp.?) furnishes the material for masquerade costumes.
148         University of California Publications in Am. Arch. and Ethn.
feeding. Each hunter hid in the top of a separate tree, from which he shot and killed the birds
with blowgun darts. Suddenly the old woman appeared in jaguar form beneath the tree in which
her son was sitting, and devoured his birds which lay on the ground. When she had disappeared,
the son climbed down from the tree to collect the remaining birds. When he returned to the tree,
a thorn pierced his foot and, as he sat down to extract it, the old woman jumped at the back of his
neck and killed him. She wrapped his liver in leaves and took it home; when her grandchildren
asked her what she had brought, she answered that it was tree fungi. Placing a pot over the fire,
she cooked the liver. The children, already suspicious because their father had not yet returned,
went to look into the pot and recognized a human liver. When the old woman went out to the
jungle again, they secretly followed her and then saw her in jaguar form eating the son's body.
Then one of the boys thrust into her anus a lance tipped with a pig's tooth. She fled, and the
children buried what was left of their father, in an armadillo burrow.
   They were already back at the house when the old woman arrived groaning. When they asked
her what had happened, she replied that, while weeding the plantation, she had fallen on a stump
and injured herself. But the grandchildren, upon examining the injury, recognized the lance
thrust. Then they built a great bonfire in the house yard, and procured a long, hollow ambafiva
trunk, splitting it lengthwise from one end only, so that the two split sections would snap together,
vibrating, when thrown hard upon the ground. In this way they played with the log, making a
terrific clatter in order to annoy the crone. At length she became enraged and stormed out of the
house screaming: "My grandchildren! Why do you make such a racket when I am ill¶" But they
seized their grandmother and threw her into the fire, burning her alive.

                                     The Man-eating Bat
In the old days there was a gigantic man-eating bat named vitI'me. If anyone stepped outside the
house at night to urinate, the bat would pounce on him and carry him off to the top of a large
burity palm, where the creature devoured its prey. Once, a man who was obliged to step out of the
house one night placed a wooden trough over his head and back. The monster at once attacked
him, but grabbed only the trough, carrying it to the burity, where, realizing that he had been
outwitted, he let it fall. Then other people who had to leave their houses at night employed the
same ruse.
   Finally, one of them marked vltlme's course of flight with his victim and set out the next day
to search in this direction. He arrived at the burity, under which was a pile of human bones and
wooden troughs. The monster was lying in the top of the tree of which the trunk was sagging
beneath his weight. The next day the man awaited the arrival of vitijme under the tree and, when
the bat flew down, fired four blowgun darts into his body. When vitl'me felt the effect of the
curare he said, "If I die now, I shall fall into the game wallow (canamet), vuibj'neI" Then he
flew up and fell down into the mud, where he sank so deep that only a section of the curvature of
his back the size of a hand could be seen. The hunter followed him to the wallow and found him
submerged. He called his children so that they might see the monster. Then he cut off the skin
from the spot still visible and divided it into small pieces to feed his children, but the hide was so
tough that nobody could chew it. The children threw the pieces away, and these turned into the
blood-sucking bats that exist today.

                          LEGENDS OF ODYSSEYS AND ADVENTURES
                                    The Errors ofcZimjdyue'
There was a woman namedcimidyuei (6imidya6'). Her husband, who thoroughly disliked her, took
her with him on a hunt. When they met a band of coatfi monkeys [Ateles sp.] he tricked her,
saying that the white sexual parts of the monkeys were the kapok [sumahuma] tufts on the butt
ends of the darts that he had alreadyfired into their bodies. She was to wait until the curare took
effect and collect the monkeys as soon as they fell, while he would go ahead to kill others. Then,
after he had killed enough, he would whistle to her as a signal to join him. So saying, he set out
for the house, leaving his wife alone in the jungle.
   c?imjdyu6' waited for a long time in vain. The monkeys did not fall, nor did she hear the signal
agreed upon. Then she realized that her husband had lied and had abandoned her. She did not
                                  Nimuendaju': The Tukuna                                       149
know where she was or how to return home. "I shall accompany the monkeys," she said. The
monkeys were eating sorva fruits [Couma sp.], and 6imidyue' gathered those which they dropped.
At sundown the monkeys assumed human form, and one of them shouted, "There are human beings
below us !" The others peered down and recognized the woman. "Why, it's cimidyuu' ! What are
you doing here?" "My husband abandoned me in the jungle," she answered, "and so I am accom-
panying youI" The monkeys arrived at a place where there was a large house. "Here are many
hammocks," they said. "Lie down in one and sleep!" cimidyue' obeyed, but the next morning
there was no house, and the monkeys again had animal form. "I shall accompany you! " cimidyub'
told them, and wandered through the jungle with the monkeys. They ate sorvas and always threw
down plenty for her to eat, so she was satisfied.
   At last they reached the dwelling of the lord of monkeys, who had human form, though he was
of a race of jaguars and lived in a big house. "What are you doing here?" he demanded of
6imidyuei. "I came with these people," she replied. "It is well," said the lord of monkeys. "I was
waiting for them in order to begin my beer-drinking festivall" Then he ordered 6imidyue' to
strain the beverage [caicuma]. She brought water from the igarap6, strained the beverage, and
everyone drank.
   The lord of monkeys slept and snored through his nose, "I shall devour cimidyue' !" cimidyue'
cried, "Grandfather, your nose is snoring my name and says that you want to eat me!" The lord
of monkeys became enraged, ordered them to bring a large kernel of a 6aivard fruit, and struck
himself on the nose with it until it began to bleed. Then he fell asleep again, but soon began to
snore in the same fashion. Again the woman awoke him, whereupon he began to maltreat his nose
furiously, catching in a gourd the flowing blood and drinking it. Then he ordered still more beer
prepared, with the result that everyone was completely befuddled.
   On the following day the lord of monkeys went hunting, but before departing he tied a long
cord to cimidyue"s leg, taking the other end of the cord with him into the jungle. From time to
time he would tug at the cord to see whether the woman was still fastened to the other end. Now,
in the same house there was a tortoise [jaboti], who was also tied fast. The tortoise told 6imidyu6'
that the lord of monkeys was really a jaguar who wanted to eat them both, and that it was high
time for them to flee. He advised her to remove the cord from her leg and tie it to a house post;
then both of them fled. They passed by the house yard of ve3kj'Ja,6 a brother of the lord of
monkeys, who was sitting at the door of his house with one leg crossed over the other. On the
tortoise' advice 6imidyue' took a cudgel and struck vonkl'6a a smart blow across the kneecap; the
pain made him draw up his leg immediately, while the woman yelled at him in her flight, "Don't
tell on us!" [Today one may still see vQnkJ'ca in the constellation of Orion.]
   When the lord of monkeys returned from hunting to find that both cim1dyue' and the tortoise
were missing, he at once set out in pursuit. Arriving at his brother's place, he asked v nkij'a if he
had seen a "fat girl" pass by. However, vegnkij'a was furious with pain and answered that he did
not want to be bothered with the "fat girl," since his knee hurt him horribly. Thereupon the lord
of monkeys gave up his search and returned home.
   While running through the jungle, cimidyue' heard a knocking on wood. Thinking that it was
some man, she followed the sound, only to find that it was merely a papoYni bird. "If you were only
human," she said, "you could show me the way to my father's house!" Then papD'ni answered
that, if she would always follow the sound of his tapping, she would arrive safely home. But he
lied, and she only became more hopelessly lost in the jungle.
   At nightfall she encountered an inambA [Tinam.us sp.], who was preening his feathers to puff
them up. 6imidyue', however, thought that she was seeing an old woman plaiting a basket from
uaruma; to her the outstretched wings looked like a house. She asked the inambfi for permission
to sleep there, which was granted, but shortly afterward the bird flew up to a tree limb, and
cimIdyu6' was obliged to sleep alone under the tree. When, on the following morning, the inamblu
flew down from the branch, again assuming human form, 6imidyueW asked the bird the way to her
father's house. "Go in the direction in which I am plaiting these uaruma strips," replied the
inambfi; but this was also a lie.
   That night 6imjdyue' hid beneath an enormous ants' nest hanging from a tree; below it the
ground was dry. But the ants' nest was really a jaguar, and at midnight 6im1dyue' heard a voice
  6 See pp. 15, 142, 147.
 150         University of California Publications in Am. Arch. and Ethn.
say, "I'll jump down on her!" "What did you say?" she asked in alarm. "I shall jump down on
you !" repeated the ants' nest. But she fled just in time. Then, because of the numerous monguba
trees, 6imjdyu6' realized that she was in the bottom lands of the Rio Solimoes. That night she slept
among the root buttresses [sapopemas] of a kapok tree, but all the animals who saw her in her
hiding place began to poke fun at her.
   A big lizard shouted: "Look ! cimidyue' is sleeping among the root buttresses! I daresay she's
hungry, but we have maize that we might roast for her!" And so speaking, the lizard produced a
noise like maize cracking in a fire. A cururu' toad [Butfo sp.] said, "As for me, I wouldn't live
among roots like this cimidyue' I I have my own house! But I'll prepare a few yams for her." And
scratching the skin of her belly, the toad imitated the sound of scraping yam tubers. With this,
the mistress of the kapok tree, the big, blue butterfly [Morphos menelaus], woke up. Yawning
aloud, she said, "Now I shall go to naugea'ne's plantation to eat pineapples I"
   Now naugea'ne was the name of 6imidyuIi"s father. "Are you speaking of my father?" At once
inquired 6imjdyu6'. "Where is he?" "Not far from here," replied the butterfly. "Then take me
there!" begged the woman. The butterfly flew ahead and, arriving at the banks of the Solimoes,
cimidyue' saw with astonishment that her father's house was on the opposite side and therefore
she had crossed the river without knowing it. Reciting a magic formula, the butterfly transformed
6imidyue' into a red dragonfly and flew with her to the other side. Then 6imidyue"s strength
almost deserted her, and only through the help of the butterfly did she reach the opposite bank,
where she at once recognized her father's plantation. She crushed the best pineapples for the
butterfly, and then both went back. cimidyue"s father, upon visiting his plantation, was astonished
to see so many broken fruits. The next day he came with his wife, and both lay in ambush. When
the butterfly and Cin4dyub' came again, naugea'ne recognized his daughter and tried to catch her,
but she escaped.
   Then naugea'ne called together others to help him, and everyone hid in the plantation on the
following days, but the butterfly and cim1dyu8' did not return until the third day. The men
managed to capture 6imidyue', while the butterfly escaped. "Help me, Grandmother!" shrieked
cimidyuei behind her, but in vain. naugea'ne took his daughter home and gave her an emetic, so
that she vomited violently and was thus restored to reason.
   Some time later, 6imidyue' met her former husband at a feast. He had come dressed in a nufimaT
mask and had a quantity of straw bound to his head. Deriding cim1dyue', he sang, "Now here
comes she whom I abandoned under the coatA monkeys!" and so on. Hearing this, cimidyue'
procured a bit of cicanta resin and lighted it. Then she called to him, "Let me see your mask!"
and, so saying, threw the blazing resin into the dry straw. He continued to dance until suddenly
the flames sprang up. Feeling the heat, he ran from the house, trying vainly to remove his tururi
costume. His belly burst with the heat. The pare'ne bird dyed his plumage with the blood.

                      The Man Who Married the Jaguar's Daughter
There was once an Indian who lived with his mother and grandmother. One day a caiarara monkey
