Fuente: Nimuendajú, Curt. The Tukuna. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 45, Berkeley, 1952, pp. 123-124 («The Acquisition of Daylight»). Extracto del texto en content/editorial/ticuna/busqueda-2026-09-19/nimuendaju-1952-the-tukuna.txt, líneas 5815-5841.
                                  The Acquisition of Daylight
In early times a permanent darkness reigned on earth. A sumahuma tree covered the entire sky
with its foliage, permitting no light to pass through. The nocturnal monkey used to pass by every
day. He had eaten nanene-cane fruits [l.g., arara tucupy] and, because of this, each time he let
fall his excrements one would see a glow. dyai' observed him and, following him secretly, found the
fruit tree. He gathered a quantity of hulls from the ground and invented the hurling-fork.23 With
it he threw hull after hull against the leafy cover. The projectiles pierced it, and through each
hole a small light appeared. Thus the stars were formed.
   22Nimuendajfi, Tukuna-Indianern, p. 189.
   28 T., kvirurud'/, a stick split at one end with a cord tied below the split. The cord is rolled round
a seed, placed in the cleft, and cast with a forceful snap of the forearm. Speiser observed similar
instruments among the Aparai, Ryd6n among the Toba, and I among the eer6nte.
124         University of California Publications in Am. Arch. and Ethn.
   Having verified in this way thatlight existed above the foliage, he, together with his brother
e'pi and aided by ants and termites, began to fell the tree. Cutting the trunk, they severed it
completely, but the tree did not fall. They thought that someliana was holding it above, and dyQi'
promised aljkina, e'pi's sister, in marriage to anyone who would climb up and loosen the tree. A
number of suitors appeared, but none succeeded in reaching the top. The big squirrel [acutipurl]
tried, but climbed only as high as a house roof and soon returned. When the little squirrel [ta'lne]
also presented himself, everyone thought that the result would be even worse. He, however, climbed
to the topmost branches and saw that it was not a liana but a two-toed sloth [Bradypuw didactylus]
that was holding the tree up. The squirrel returned, collected many fire ants [T., un/ne], placed
them on his flattened tail, and climbed up again. Coming up to the sloth, he threw the ants into
its eyes, then quickly descended, since the sloth immediately let go of the tree and began to fall.
The squirrel had not yet reached the ground when the tree crashed, and from the force of the
rebound his tail was bent over his back. He married aikine.
                                   The Acquisition of Sleep
