 Biblioteca Digital Curt Nimuendajú - Coleção Nicolai
 www.etnolinguistica.org




                Desana Mythology:
             Oral lndigenous Literature

                                                              Berta G. Ribeiro
                                                        National Museum, Río de Janeiro




                                            Abstract
        Mythic narrative in an indigenous community is not only an end
        in itself. It elaborates an interpretive discourse about the world, a
        shared past, anda common pattem ofbehavior. Among the Desana
        of the Brazilian Amazon, mythology serves two purposes: It is a
        basis for reinforcing a lifestyle anda means of resisting encroach-
        ments on the tribe' s identity. The authorworked with two members
        ofthe Desana tribe, rewriting the final draft oftheir anthology of
        tribal myths, a book that attempts to preserve the Desana mythol-
        ogy and ethnic heritage.
    In 1980, two Amazonian lndians, Umusin Panlon Kumu and bis son,
Tolaman Kenhiri, members of the Desana tribe ofthe Tiquie River in the
northwest Brazilian Amazon, published a collection of rnyths entitled
Be/ore the World Existed. The title, corresponds to the first sentence ofthe
Desana creation myth, introduces the Desana tribe's account of its origins
-an indigenous epic aboutthe creation ofthe world and ofhumanity. The
unique contribution ofthese writers was to transpose a sacred oral narrative
to a written secular text, illustrating it with explanatozy drawings.
     First written in the Desana Ianguage, the text was translated into
Portuguese by the younger author, who learned toread and write during bis
five years of attendance at a school directed by Salesian missionaries.
Tolarnan, whose Christian name is Luiz Gomes 1.ana, and his father,
Umusin Panlon Kumu, wanted to perpetuate the ancestral mythology of
                              Berta G. Ribeiro                            167

their tribe, and to make it accessible not only to new generations of the
Tukano-speaking indigenous groups, but also to non-Indian readers versed
in Portuguese, who would be impressed by the stories' lyricism.
      Kumu and Kenhiri' s book was considered ''a literary work pertaining
to the mythical genre'' by Angel Rama (1982), an eminent Uruguayan
literary critic. Rama had not thought as highly of other texts compiled by
cultural mythologists because, in his opinion, they failed to pay attention
to the strictly literary aspects ofthe stories. In comparing the myths recorded
by Kumu and Kenhiri with those related by Antonio Guzman, a Colombian
Desana, to G. Reichel-Dolmatoff(1968}, Ramajudged the fonnercosmo-
logical narrative to be more literary, more subtle, more complex, and
containing more implicit meaning. Rama found the work ofGuzman more
of a ''rigorous adaptation of an 'anthropological account' model'' (p. 88).
      Rama also stated that Kumu and Kenhiri's book, in addition to
rendering mythic stories of importance to anthropologists, added a literary
perspective that contributed to the current development of the surrealistic
''fantastic reality'' of Latín American literature. For decades, renowned
writers have incorporated themes, characters, and narrative nuances of
Latin American folklore in their work, as one can see in the specialized
bibliography at the end ofKumu and Kenhiri's book. Kumu and Kenhiri's
book, according to Rama, is a ''transcultural narrative,'' embodying a
quality also present in the work ofJose Maria Arguedas, Juan Rulfo, Joao
Guimaraes Rosa, Gabriel Garcia Marques, and various other writers who
have broken the baniers of prejudice and given a voice to the culture ofthe
lower classes (p. 229).
      This posture represents a parallel development to the ''plastic transcul-
turation'' that, according to the art historian Robert Goldwater (1966), took
place at the beginning of the 20th century when Van Gogh, Gauguin,
Picasso, Klee, Mondrian, Matisse, Modigliani, and Miro took inspiration
from African, Native American, and Melanesian art, revolutionizing the
plastic arts of Western culture. In this case, the discovery of art among
people who do not have a written language met the creative necessities of
modem artists, lending their work a richer though eccentric content.
      The indigenous groups of the Tukano linguistic family are classified
as ''Indians of the River''; they live along the fluvial arteries of the black
waters that bathe soil Iackingnutrients, the so-called te"afirmaofthe upper
Negro River in the northwest Amazon. Adapted to this ecosystem, which
is classified by ecologists as ''oligotrophic'' (acid soil that is very poor in
nutrients), they maintain symbiotic relationship with the Indians of the
168         The Humanistic Psychologist, 22, Summer 1994

Forests (the Maku) with whom they exchange fish and manioc flour for
game and forest products.
      The basic social units are the clans. They used to occupy a communal
hut, but today Iive in one-family houses. They relate their descent only from
the paternal line; the men marry women from clans of other tribes of the
same or of different linguistic families. That is, they segment themselves
in hierarchical patrilineal Iineages whose residence is patrilocal.
Exogamous maniage results in a network of reciprocal relationships be-
tween the various tribes and clans. These folkways are directly related to
tribal myths such as those recorded by Kumu and Kenhiri.

                  The Generating Power of Myths
      Mythic material is penneated with imagination, but it also contains
infonnation about history and social practices, and has become a valuable
resource forethnologists. From these mythological accounts, current social,
political, and ideological priorities can be better understood.
     In the structural analysis proposed by Claude Levi-Strauss
(1958/1975), the units of significance in myths are the mitemas. A mitema
(or ''mythic theme'') resembles a paradigm; it is a segregated set of
cbaracteristics that contrast with another intemally consistent set Many
times, arbitrmy symbols are found in mythic narratives that can only be
decoded when the native Ianguage, including its phonology and grammar,
is known. Levi-Strauss (1964/1969) describes a myth as a ''matrix of
significance'' that relates incessantly to other matrices. The highest quality
of a myth is a guiding function that affmns both the cosmic order and the
social order. As Egon Schaden (1945) writes in bis Heroic Mythology of
the Indigenous Tribes ofBrazil:
      The specificity ofthe social function ofmyth was revealed forthe
      frrst time by K. Th. Preuss, who emphasized that the mythic
      narration did not only have a simple explanatory intent, demon-
      strating the origin ofsocial institutions, values, and ritual perfonn-
      ances, but also provided a necessary and sufficient guarantee that
      these rituals and ceremonies were effective, that the institutions
      were legitimate, and that the moral values and standards recog-
      nized and accepted by the tribe were valid. (pp. 17-18)
      Tribal mythology recounts the origin ofvarious ethnic groups as well
as nature as a whole. In this capacity, it served to liberate the imagination
of tite group, assuming the character of speculative thought that comple-
ments empirical knowledge. However, the anthropologists queried, why
was imaginative material needed if the Indians were able to engage in
                                                                                 •
                              Berta G. Ribeiro                           169

 rational explanations? The answer appears to be that empirical observation
 never provided a sufficient explanation for everything the Indians experi-
 enced. As a result, myth became a form through which human societies
 explored such universal feelings as love, bate, and revenge, as well as to
 provide explanations for meteorological, astronomical, and other natural
 phenomena.
       Mythic narrative is constructed by means ofruptures and discontinui-
 ties. The historical content of myth is revealed through the cJoak of
 allegorical explanations because mythic content has meanings that are not
 overtly perceptible. Finally, the stories of cultural heroes provide a nonn
 for behavior and a guide to ethical procedures. One function of myth is to
 distinguish deviations from approved social behavior, f orbidding them in
 the narne of ''mythical truth, '' and reinforcing nonnative behavior. Another
 function is to respond to metaphysical unrest in the society by clarifying
 the natural course of action taken by humanity and the cosmos.
       In addition, mythic narrative is congruent with a propensity for
storytelling common to ali human groups. However, it is necessary to
 differentiate myth from legends, fairy tales, and fables, ali of which are
similar types of oral literature. Myth is the narration of transcendent
episodes that transcend time and are ahistoric. These episodes matriculate
themselves in a cyclic time which always retums, and can be re-enacted in
rituals . For ali these reasons, mythic narration is inevitably impregnated
with faith and emotion to a greater extent than other fonns oforal literature.
       Anthropologists seek to understand how a myth responds to the needs
ofthe people who forged it They investigate the themes and allegories that
explain to a group the preerninent questions of existence and at the same
time the group' s daily concrete problems. This focus on the significance of
tite myth's message has become more important than the investigation of
the myth' s origín or the purity of its narrative.
      The value and evolution oftraditional myths are also studied. In the
words of Darcy Ribeiro (1980), ''an active tradition survives precisely
because it is able to adapt'' (p. 70). The study of how a myth has been
presetved helps explain the values, attitudes, and behaviors of an ethnic
group. For example, the South American Kadiweu Indians explain the
creation of day and night as the recommendation of the ''Trickster,'' an
astute and mischievous person present in tribal myths who is often a
companion and counselor to the cultural heroes. In Kadiweu mythology,
the Trickster told the Creator that ''The moon should not light up the sky
too much so employers will not be able to exploit their workers by making
them work at night'' (p. 43).
170          The Humanistic Psychologist, 22, Summer 1994

      The Kadiweu were not endowed with vast riches and tenitories by tite
Creator Iike their neighbors, but were given the skills of waniors instead.
Therefore, when horses were introduced in South America, the Kadiweu
leaders, according to the myth, had the foresight to utilize them, tuming the
tribe into ''Indian riders,'' and expanding their domination overa vast area,
including the agricultural tribes that paid them tribute.
      The hierarchical prerogatives of the Tukano in relation to the many
tribes that speak dialects of the same language of the upper Negro River,
also were explained by the mythic narrative. According to these myths,
humanity emerged from the depths ofthe land and the water. But itwas the
Tukano who were the frrst to step on the surface of the land afl:er a long
underwater voyage, floating in the belly of a gigantic snake-canoe or
transfonning canoe. To the Tukano fell the privilege ofoccupying the best
lands, and the rivers with the most splendid waterfalls, and tite most
sparkling riverfronts where fish were plentiful. To disrespect these myths
and to deviate from the tribal folkways based on them was !o face social
and cosmic chaos. On the other hand, to obey these prescriptions was to
guarantee the cosmic equilibrium as well as to preserve social and environ-
mental hannony.
      Although it is not possible to speak about a single generic indigenous
mythology, it is possible to detect sorne characteristic threads found in
myths. One is the presence of the Trickster, an arnbiguous character who
plays the part ofthe mediator, e.g., between right and wrong, between truth
and error. In the case of sorne New World myths, for example those ofthe
Pueblo tribe ofNorth America, the Trickster is represented by the raven
who is an intennediary between herbivores and camivores. The raven eats
meat, but does not kili its prey, constituting a type of mediation between
life and death. These Tricksters, as mediators, establish a logical articulation
between the pararneters ofmythic threats. Sorne analysts have commented
on the complex.ity and significance ofthese metaphors, as did Levi-Strauss
(1958/1975, pp. 259-260) in bis essay, ''The Structure ofthe Myth.''
      In the mythic pantheon we encounter cultural heroes as well as
characters who are secondary or marginal, ali of whom are capable of
exploits and feats that elude the power of ordinary mortals. Many ofthese
individuals are immortal, having the power to die and to be rebom many
times. Meanwhile, they are subject to the universal laws which they
themselves established. They Iive incamated in a human body, subject to
such biological necessities as hunger, thirst, pain, fatigue, and sleep. They
participate with humans in romantic and sexual relationships; sex, forthem,
is both a means ofreproduction anda source of pleasure. Finally, they have
                               Berta G. Ribeiro                               171

the capacity for turbulence and violence, but constantly re-enact a meta-
morphosis that blocks total destruction.
      Another common characteristic of native mythology is the presence
of pairs of siblings or twins who help (or embarrass) the Supreme Being in
the task oforganizing Iife and society. In sorne myths, a struggle for power
occurs between these twins and tite Creator, a conflict that will continue
until the causes ofthe conflict stop. Vulnerable and mercurial, these twins
face one obstacle after another in the expression oftheir natural divinity, to
tite extentthatthey may even become human beings. Once humanized, they
often disappear or die, allowing the Creator's plans to proceed.
      Finally, a crucial characteristic of mythological accounts is tite force
ofthe word and the power ofthe name. In this respect, Emst Cassirer ( 1946)
writes, ''In tite accounts of creation, in almost ali of the grand cultural
religions, the word always appears united with the highest creator deity...
In that respect, the deity's thoughts and verbal expression are typically
conceptualized to be only a single entity'' (p. 65).
      Generally, in indigenous conceptions, things exist because they have
names. These names ought to be repeated and remembered because, ifthey
are not, the entities they name will cease to exist. Everything that has a
meaning has a name; to be given a narne is to acquire significance. As Aracy
L. da Silva ( 1989) writes, referring to the Brazilian Xavante tribe, ''To name
something is to make it real... The acquisition of distinct personal names .
during the life-span guarantees the growth and the continuity of every
human being... For tite Xavante, everything exists potentially, but it is the
action ofhuman or of supematural beings, that actually creates things'' (p.
337). This concept is exemplified by a fragment of a Xavante myth:
      Long ago, people were starving. Two boys decided to create moni
      (an edible root). When one ofthem decided to create the root in a
      f orest, he called the other. ''Look, there is moni here. '' When its
      name was uttered, the root was created. (p. 338)
     In the Quechua language ofPeru, the ''word-thing'' is conceptualized
in the same way as the ''name-power'' in the culture ofthe Xavante Indians.
Angel Rama (1982), examining the influence ofthe Quechua language and
culture in the novels of Jose Maria Arguedas, observes that in Quechua,
''The word is a thing and not merely the meaning ofsomething represented
by its sound'' (p. 235). Rama explains that because the mythic narrative is
oral literature, it associates the sound with the word in the sense that
Ferdinand de Saussure attributes to ''linguistic signs.'' This characteristic,
172          The Humanistic Psychologist, 22, Summer 1994

and the association between words and music, are present in Arguedas'
work as Rama (1982) points out:
       Furthermore, since it is a spoken word and not a written word, its
       evocative capacity is related to music's evocative capacity, al-
       though, as we know, the latter exert itselfmore freely for it fmds
       itselfdetached from the precise meanings which the linguistic sign
       entails. (p. 246)
      Later, in the same context, Rama writes:
       The word is not seen as writing but is heard as sound. In an era
       when poetry had already become a written fonn of expression, he
       [Arguedas] still perceived it as a phoneme, relating words inti-
       mately to musical markers. A trace of bis upbringing in the bosom
       of agraphic communities, ofhis passion for song, wherein words
       recuperate their sonorous plenitude, in Arguedas' work the word
       does not dissociate itself from the voice which emits it, intones it
       and puts it to music. For this reason, it can be said that bis narrative
       is more than written literature, it is an enunciation. (p. 247)
    Perhaps the generating power ofwords explains the tendency for the
same pirrase to be repeated emphatically in the narrative ofthe myth. Not
only does the repetition confer emphasis and rhythm on the narrative's
elocution, it also reinforces the creative power ofthe repeated word. A myth
is rooted in the history of the tribe, yet is re-created during each retelling;
this combination ofthe past and the present acts to unify the society and its
component institutions as well as to mediate ongoing change.
      Quite often a myth is theatrically enacted in rituals. On these occasions,
the intent of the myth is enticingly and aesthetically presented through
dances, songs, painted bodies, and decorated objects. Songs are accompa-
nied by gestures, movements, imitations ofanimal voices, and by dramatic
or comic intonations that are able to impregnate the perfonnance of the
actors with excitement and realism.
      The funeral rite of the Brazilian Xingu Indians, the kuarup, is one of
the best known mythic rituals because it has been described in the anthro-
pological literature, and filmed. Perfonned during the funeral setvices of
tribal leaders, the kuarup recounts the creation myth of the cultural hero,
who sculpted statues of wood (or kuarups), gave them life, and brought
humanity into being. According to Mircea Eliade (1954/1988), this type of
performance only assumes cosmological meaning ''by deliberately repeat-
ing these acts practiced ah origine by God, heroes, or ancestors'' (p. 20).
      Whether enacting the rite or listening to the myth, each participant
feels as ifhe or she has inherited a tradition that has an enduring past- the
                              Berta G. Ribeiro                            173

legacy of the ancestors who created the world, and who created human
beings as well, giving them the knowledge bywhich they were able to make
the earth habitable. Fulfilling these social functions contributes to the
perpetuation not only of the mythological corpus but also of the ethnic
group that created it. According to Schaden (1945, p. 16), the essential
characteristic of the cosmological myths is to assure a society of its
specificity as a people through its faith in a common origin and destination
(p. 16).
      This analysis of creation myths is based, in part, on the assumption
that for the Indians these myths are comprised of the mysteries of the past
and the ideology of the present The myths that relate to the creation of the
world emphasize that the creators imposed order on the universe where,
earlier, chaos had reigned. Then heroic figures endowed their creatures with
cultural goods so as to make their lives viable. This ''cultural revolution''
manifested itselfthrough rituals created bythe civilizing heroes. A mythical
legislation was established that can be seen as a body ofrules forthe moral,
political, and social ordination of society, acode that still operates in many
indigenous societies.
      In these instances, that which we interpret as mythic narrative is, f or
the Indians, a natural dimension that appeared in the infancy of humanity
and progressed, alrnost without modification, until the present. In the
mythic narrative, there is no distinction between mythological time and
actual time. Human beings and animals continually interactwith each other,
tuming this pristine order into a sinless, utopian paradise. This view
excludes a conception of history as we understand it. In sorne tribal
societies, in fact, interest in the group's histoty tends to be understood as
evidence of acculturation, i.e., the influence ofWestem thought

                The Magical World of the Desana
     In the Desana cosmology, life emerged from an aquatic environment
The Desana refer to themselves as wai mahsa which rneans ''fish people. ''
They also speak ofthemselves as emekho masha which meaos ''people of
the universe'' or ''people ofthe day. '' Such cultural heroes as Boleka ofthe
Desana tribe and Doe Tiro ofthe Tukano tiibe, also have the names ofthe
aracu fish (Leporinus speci~s) and the traira fish (Hoplias malabaricus),
respectively.
     In the worldview of the Desana Indians, there exist two worlds, tite
visible and the invisible, equally authentic, and both superimposed on living
things, including human beings. Thus, human beings, in order to eam an
174          The Humanistic Psychologist, 22, Summer 1994

acceptable quality of life for themselves, must create conditions through
which ali other living creatures subsist (Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1975). The
visible world is terrestrial and has its image mirrored in both the cosmic
space and the subterranean or the subaquatic world.
      The creation myth reproduced in Before the World Existed, is titled,
''How Yeba belo Appeared out of Nothing.'' Yeba belo, whose name
means ''Great-Grandmother Earth, the One Who Was Not Created,''
creates herself in a subterranean room made of quartz from six invisible
objects - benches, cooking utensils, gourds filled with tapioca, gourds
filled with ipadu (Erythroxylum coca), cigars, and cigar holders. She
creates, in sequence, her five Thunderbolt Brothers and asks them to
populate tite great sphere, the Emekho pato/e (Universe belly) that she
produces through the power of her imagination. Since they do not know
how to do this, Yeba belo creates a new being called Yeba ngoaman (earth
creator) with the smoke from her cigarette. This being, also known as
Emeko sulan Panlamin (Universe, sulan, great-grandson), canies out the
task of populating the great sphere.
      Among the Brazilian Desana, Yeba belo the Creator is female, but
among the Colombian Desana, the deity is male. In the fonner version, the
feminine principie, solitary and pristine, is balanced by tite masculine
principle's regulation of real society. Likewise, the creative actions ofthe
great-grandmother of the world are complemented by those of masculine
cultural heroes.
      On the ideological level, material elements, existent in the real world,
are also present in this account, although here they are endowed with
magical powers and are invisible. The great-grandmother ofthe world, for
example, creates herselffrom goods for the ''spirit,'' e.g., tobacco and coca,
and from tapioca as well, which is a food for the body extracted from tite
manioc (Manihot esculenta) root. She draws out tiny tobacco seeds from
her left breast to make the earth and, in order to f ertilize it, she pours milk
out of her right breast. Here, the act of creation can be seen as a metaphor
of the feminine condition: horticulture which sows and harvests.
      With the assistance of a rattle-spear (a spiritual object also known as
a magical stafi) created by Yeba belo, her great-grandson, Yeba ngoaman,
created the sun. He joumeyed to the House of the Third Thunderbolt,
repository of many luxurious bodily decorations which contained the
substance later used to create humanity, and invited him to assist in the act
of creation.
      Before making this agreement, the Third Thunderbolt taught Yeba
ngoaman and bis companion, Boleka, chiefofali the Desana, howto create
                             Berla G. Ribeiro                           175

the first women out oftheirvomit spilt into the river. The vomit symbolized
a birth as enacted by male creatures. This is expressed by the mythic text,
 ''Their vomit was like a childbirth that brought about the appearance ofthe
first women. '' In this episode there is a parallel to the themes of the
Fish-Woman, the River lndians, and, perhaps, the allegocy in which eating
 is made equivalent to copulating.
      Created in the belly of an anaconda (Eunectes murinus), also referred
to as a snake-canoe or a transfonning canoe, humanity matures as it goes
ashore at tite transfonning houses. At each of these houses, rites are
perfonned in orderto assure its development In this episode, there is a clear
analogy between fetal maturation and that ofhumanity. The ''transfonning
houses,'' the womb ofthe giant-snake-canoe and the subtemmean layer of
quartz where Yeba belo, the ''one who was not created," appeared,
represent primeval uteri. The fetus and humanity both develop in an
aqueous environment; ontogenesis repeats phylogenesis in the Desana's
way of thinking. At the same time, tite phallic rattle-spear thrown from its
pristine subterranean womb flew through the grand sphere, the Belly ofthe
Universe (emekho pato/e) created by the great-grandmother, segmenting
the layers of the cosmos and creating the sun, which is considered the
fertilizer of the earth - the masculine principie.
      The name of the rattle-spear - yei wai ngoa, i.e., the wildcat or
shaman - as well as the fish and the bone, contains the most powerful
symbolic elements. They refer to the power of the wildcat (equivalent to
that of the shaman into which he at times metamorphosized himself), the
fish (which represented the proto-Desana), and the bone (which, like the
quartz, is transfonnative and eternal). The Civilizing Heroes were always
powerful shamans who had access to caapi, a psychedelic plant (i.e.,
Banisteriopsis caap1) and to whom is attributed the feat of having created
culture as it is known today. Yeba belo did not consume psychedelics, nor
do tribal women today. Women are excluded from most of these rituals;
moreover, they are kept in ignorance of mate initiation practices, so as to
keep them from obtaining too much power and knowledge.
      During the act ofcosmic creation, Yeba ngoaman held the rattle-spear
vertically to reach the House ofthe Third Thunder. But the movement of
the snake-canoe -where humanity gestated- and the Iocalization ofthe
''transfonning houses'' were horizontal and geographically defined. From
the 54th house, ordinary women and men stepped on the earth for the frrst
time. From then on, they dispersed themselves, making an underground
voyage to Jands that correspond to the current location of each linguistic
group. The first twelve houses are situated within a mythological space. In
176          The Humanistic Psycho/ogist, 22, Summer 1994

Kenhiri's conception, the lake and the river of milk are, respectively, the
Atlantic Ocean (or Lake Titicaca) and the Amazon River.
      From the 13th transfonning house on, the localization of each can be
charted in the region populated today by the Desana and the Tukano. In one
ofthese houses the Iaw of exogamy, which prevents a man from manying
a woman from his own tribe, was established. At that time, Gahpi mahsan
(''caapi-person'') was bom; he symbolized the Banisteriopsis caapi plant,
which evokes visions and claitvoyance. The onset of these visions was
provocative, confounding humans. And from undifferentiated humanity,
the indigenous groups living in the Northwestem Amazon arise, each with
its own language and matrimonial rules. The intention ofcreation expressed
by Yeba belo (the feminine principie) was fulfilled by the creature she
generated (the masculine principie). These acts of creation, present in
indigenous thought, get mixed up with mythical, sexual, and factual aspects
of their existence in real Iife.
      The mythological heritage also includes records ofhistorical events.
For example, tite Europeans extenninated two tribes living on the Tiquie
River, Ieaving the area uninhabited. This opened the way for two clans of
Iow prestige to migrate from their homes on the Papuri River to the
uninhabited area at the Tiquie River, leaving behind the higher-caste clans.
This historical event, preserved through memoiy and oral transmission, is
thought to refer to the clan from which the authors Kumu and Kenhiri
   •
spnng.
      Another myth in this anthology refers to the origin of the pejibaye
(Bactris gasipaes). The pejibaye, which resembles a palm tree, bears fleshy
fruit characterized by a nutritious, fatty, thick pulp and a pleasant taste. In
this tale, Gain panan, the anthropomorphized ancestor of the parakeets
(Brotogeris tirica), manied a fish-woman, the daughter ofthe Great Snake
of the River, the sucuri (Eimectes murinus), who previously had been
married to the piranha-fish (Serrassalmus species}, and was pregnant from
this union.
      Gain panan manied tite pregnant fish-woman because he lived alone.
Therefore he was ilot able to offer a woman from his group to bis
prospective bride' s group, according to the reciprocal practices of titase
clans. The artífices employed by Gain panan included obtaining timbo
(Lonchocarpus, a poisonous plant), and using the poison to kili the piranha
fetuses in the fish-woman's womb, so that he could many her.
      This myth, like various others, describes a primeva} time in which
humans, animals, and supematural beings were still undifferentiated. These
episodes resemble, on a metaphorical level, the techniques of fishing, the
                              Berta G. Ribeiro                            177

tlteme of the origin of the Desana tribe (also designated wai mahsa -the
fish-people), and the myth of castration - the biting vulva (Cerulli, 1986,
p. 239).
      It also describes how both human and animal characters can be
identified according to their eating habits. When asked what she ate, the
fish-woman responded, ''Wonns, grasshoppers, ants, tennites, and other
insects.'' This is the same food eaten by certain species of fish from the
upper Negro River, and serves to specify the fish-woman's location.
      This principie also characterizes the interchange when the daughter
answers her father, the Great Snake of the River, following bis question,
''What does your new husband eat?'' The reply was ''The husband eats
us,'' that is, he eats fish, a circumstance which did not impede the conjuga}
relationship. Cerulli (1986) sees these dialogues as an allegory of
exogamous marriage - going outside one's clan or tribe for a marriage
partner (p. 241 ). The relatives ofthe fish-woman lived in huts, Jike humans,
and planted manioc and ipadu (Erythroxylum coca) in their fields. Like
humans, they decorated their bodies and established practices of collabo-
ration and solidarity with their spouses and relatives.
      A constant metamorphosis from people to animals, and vice versa,
unfolds in the myth ''The Story of Anga mahsan pe'' (the large Tinamous,
person, father), followed by the story ofthe Diloa (tiny fish) and ofthe Koa
yea (gourds, shamans). The latter tale explains that
      Once humanity had evolved into pahmelin mahsa (transformation,
      people), the group of Anga mahsan pe appeared. He was the chief
      of those birds who ali sing at a certain hour of the day (e.g.,
      Tinamous genus: trumpeters, guanos, sun grebes, curassows, bit-
      tems, partridges, kingfishers). (Kumu & Kenhiri, 1980, p. 161)
      Anga mahsan pe was the chief ofhis clan (orfratria) and he was like
a singing faun (or satyr) who seduces women. But he is upstaged in bis
romantic conquests by the equally rapacious Opossum (Oa, in Desana) who
is ugly and f oul-smelling and, in addition, transmits bis stench to the women
he debauches. Their behavior becomes so outrageous that, atthe end ofthis
narrative, both Anga and Oa die and are transfonned into other creatures.
      The key to these transfonnations is the bone. Hard and perennial, it is
present in the roots of such names as the Creator Yeba ngoaman (''ngoa''
means ''bone''), as well as in the names of the sacred flotes that were used
to establish male dominion and the laws of exogamy (talosu wai ngoa =
reed, fish, bone). Ngoa is also present in the name of the rattle-scepter (yei
wai ngoa = wildcat or shaman, fish, bone) - a phallic symbol used in the
initiation ofboys as well as to signify the chiefs higher status.
178         The Humanistic Psycho/ogist, 22, Summer 1994

       The myth flows with coherence and magic, dialectically explicating
the polarities of self/other, man/wornan, natural environment/cultural en-
vironment, gain/loss, thus alluding to life, death, and resurrection. This
narrative endeavors to symbolically deploy the reconstruction ofthe origin
of libidinous conflicts generated in order to obtain, through force as well
as cunning, sexual partners outside the tribal group. Another myth relates
the confrontations between the grandmothers of Oa and Anga as they try
to avenge the death of their respective grandsons. When Oa is killed by
Anga's followers, bis grandmotherretrieves his thighbone, transfonning it
into hawks who massacre Anga and throw his corpse to the jungle cats.
       After the grandmother of Anga avenges the death of her grandson,
her husband takes possession ofhis bone. From this emerged the Diloa, two
Iittle fish that transfonn themselves, successivel)' and through their own
power, into crickets, twin children, small birds, and then into adult men.
The myth relates, with richness of detail, the deeds and dangers that the
twins confront, as well as the system of rituals associated with the histori-
cal-cultural context ofthe upper River Negro region. Italso gives an account
of the invention of the hand-made plaited designs of the fish-children, an
artistic basketry technique that is an exclusive specialty of the Desana.
Furthennore, it describes the fmal battle in which the Diloas, sending forth
thunderbolts, destroy the group ofjaguars. Then the Diloas realize that they
have also destroyed the grandmotherwho had raised them. They revive her,
but ''with her rose ali the Koa yea'' (gourds, jungle cats) for this grand-
mother was also Koa yea. ''Since this is so,'' said the Diloa, ''our grand-
mother must also die.''
      Among tite most beautiful and complete myths in the anthology Be/ore
the World Existed, this narrative suggests severa} interpretations, princi-
pally regarding the relationship between myth and folklore. lt portrays a
fabulous biography of cultural heroes which, according to Mircea Eliade
( 1954/1972), would draw the myth closer to both the pessimism of a saga
and the optimism of the fantastic tale. With respect to its antecedents, in
both the saga and the tale, there operates a ''progressive desacralization of
the mythical world," as Eliade (1954/1972) states:
      At the level of the ''primitive cultures,'' the distance that separates
      myths from tales is less clear-cut than in cultures in which a
      profound abyss exists between the class ofintellectuals and ofthe
      general populace. (p. 172)
     Under these conditions, the appearance of the fantastic tale (not its
origin, which is more difficult to detennine) is of interest to the historian
                                                                                .
                                Berta G. Ribeiro                               179

of religions and, possibly, the historian of literature and the litenuy critic.
The Desana myth-tellers, like so many others, incorporated into the tribal
mythologicaJ corpus specific historical events and themes of the Roman
Catholic religion - conception without camal. contact, revelation, the
arrival of Messiahs. Personalities of Christianity were given names from
the Desana language, e.g., Kiritu for Christ, Kurusa for cross, Balia for
Mary, Yuse for Joseph. A white man also appears in the Desana mythology
as a passenger on the pahmelin gahsilu (transfonning canoe) from which
he emerges anned with a rifle. lncapable of understanding the tribe's
institutions, he is driven away to the south by the Creator.
      You are the last one. 1gave the first ones all my possessions. Since
      you carne last, you ought to have no fear. You should make war
      and appropriate riches from others. In this way you will find
      money. (Kumu & Kenhiri, 1980, p. 74)
     A recurrent theme in the mythology of severa} tribes, including that
ofthe Desana, is that present-day humanity is a second orthird generation.
The previous one (orones) was (or were) destroyed by cataclysms. Before
these catastrophes, people were ''uncultivated'': they did not know how to
make fire, did not recognize the plants which they now raise, and ignored
the equipment that pennitted them to dominate nature. The cultural heroes
created the world and human beings, teaching them the techniques that
today they have mastered, giving the necessary procedures ''to their
people. '' These benefits are frequently mentioned in mythology; as a result,
this belief augments the tribe's transcendence, connecting them to a pri-
mordial time and to the ancestral creators.

                       lmagination and Esthetics
      Be/ore the World Existed can be considered a ''transcultural narrative''
in the sense that Angel Rama uses the tenn to examine the indigenous
literary work of the Peruvian writer Jase Maria Arguedas. Kumu and
Kenhiri share the same vision as Arguedas: to rescue a mythological
heritage treated by the refined nonn as ''infantile, '' ''primitive," and
''destined to total disappearance'' once the tribes become ''civilized''
(Eliade, 1963/1972, p. 9).
      In the book, Kenhiri tries to transpose to Portuguese the syntax of his
language which lacks prepositions, and whose adjectives and verbs are used
at the end of a phrase. In Desana, it is said, ''I from this tribe a citizen am, ''
or, ''In this world he made appear said, '' or even, ''Life from a cigar was
bom. '' His narrative is disciplined and rhytlunic; it lacks rhetoric without
180          The Humanistic Psychologist, 22, Summer 1994

being chy or laconic. Despite the economy of words, it is rich in images.
For example, characterizing an ancestral group, the Ye bolei (white wild-
cat), he explains that ''it wasn't white like lime, it was white like the day''
(p. 80).
      Not content with creating a literary translation oftribal mythology, in
which he highlighted episodes and defmed characters, Kenhiri wanted bis
readers to be able to visualize the episodes. The SO sketches thathe produced
are not merely illustrations for the book, but a translation from the imagi-
nmyto the visible image. Atthis point, itwould beworthwhileto distinguish
the aesthetic from the artistic. By their veiy nature, the mythological stories
which give an account ofcreation, relating the trials, obstacles, and feats of
primeval heroes, enclose as aesthetical-magical content The artistic is
construed through tite translator, the person who transcribes an oral narra-
tive, in written fonn, to yet another language.
      Angel Rama (1982) endeavors to demonstrate that in the zeal to
become independent, Latin American literature distanced itself from its
lberian roots, as well as its Indian and Afiican matrices (p. 13). A similar
attitude was taken by the anthropologists in diwlging tite oral literature of
the tribes that they studied. In this case, they expunged native peoples'
writings ofsupposed ''profane'' artistic omaments that they thought would
compromise its scientific ''purity."
      However, it must be acknowledged that a careful study ofthe litermy
aspects of the Jangua.ge employed in the myths of agraphic peoples will
enable anthropologists' interpretations to surpass the limits imposed by the
analysis of fonnal tenninological systems. As the mythological corpus,
divulged in anthropological monographs, begins to circulate outside the
narrow sphere of the specialists, its will awaken the kind of awe inspired
by the fantastic tale. This will not impede mythology, asan autonomous
creation anda system of representations, from conserving its symbols and
metaphors, and from perfonning its consequent socio-religious role in the
relation to the ethnic group who produced the mythology; indeed, it will
confer identity and authenticity on it

                               References
Cassirer, E. (1946). Language and myth. New York: Dover. Cerulli, E. (1986).
     L'analisi del mito e la cultura tradizionale desana. [The analysis ofmyth
     in traditional Desana culture.] In F.A. Lana & L.G. Lana, JI ventre
     dell'universo [The womb ofthe universe] (pp. 183-253). Palenno, Italy:
     Sellerio Editora.
                                 Berta G. Ribeiro                         181

Eliade, M. (1988). The myth ofthe eternal return. New York: Harper and Row.
      (Original work published 1954)
Eliade, M. (1972). Myth and reality. New York: Harper and Row. (Original
      work published 1963)
Goldwater, R. (1986). Primitivism in modern art (2nd ed). Cambridge, MA:
      Harvard University Press.
Kumu, U.P., & Kenhiri, T. (1980). Antes o mundo nao existia: A mito/ogia
      heroica dos indios Desana. [Before the world existed: The heroic mythol-
      ogy ofthe Desana Indians.] Sao Paulo: Cultura. Levi-Strauss, C. (1975).
      A estrutura dos mitos [The structure ofmyths]. InAntropologia estrutura/
      [Structural anthropology] (vol. 1). Rio de Janeiro: Tempo Brasileiro.
      (Original work published 1958) Levi-Strauss, C. (1969). The raw and the
      cooked. New York: Harper and Row. (Original work published 1964)
Rama, A. (1982). Transculturacion narrativa en America Latina [Narrative
      transculturation in Latin America.] Mexico City: Siglo XXI.
Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. (1975). Cosmology as ecological analysis: A view from
      the rainforest. Man, 2(3), 307-318. Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. (1968). Sim-
      bolismo de los indios Tukano del Uaupes [Symbolism of the Tukano
      Indians of the Uaupes]. Bogota: Procultura. (Original work published
      1968)
Ribeiro, B.O. (1980). Introduction. In U.P. Kumu & T. Kenhiri, Antes o mundo
      nao existia: A mitologia heroica dos indios Desana [Before the world
      existed: The heroic mythology of the Desana Indians] (pp. 1-45). Sao
      Paulo: Cultura.
Ribeiro, D. (1980). Kadiweu: Ensaios etnologicos sobre o saber, o azar e a
      beleza [Kadiweu: Ethnological essays on knowledge, misfortune, and
      beauty.] Petropolis: Vozes.
Schaden, E. (1945). A mito/ogia heroica de tribos indigenas do Brasil. [The
      heroic mythology of indigenous Brazilian tribes.] Rio de Janeiro: Docu-
      mentation Service, Ministzy of Education and Culture.
Silva, A. L. da (1989). Social practice and the ontology in Akwe-Xavante
      naming and myth. Ethnology, 28, 331-442.




This article was translated by Stanley Krippner. Berta Ribeiro holds a Ph.D.
in anthropology. He is currently an anthropologist with the National
Museum in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Address correspondence to him care of
Stanley Krippner, Saybrook Institute, 450 Pacific Avenue, San Francisco,
CA 94109.

                  Biblioteca Digital Curt Nimuendajú - Coleção Nicolai
                                  www.etnolinguistica.org
